Indiana Spectacle: Religious Freedom and Gay Rights

Regarding your editorial "The New Intolerance" (March 31): You argue that the law is basically benign because "a commercial vendor would still have to prove that his religious convictions were substantially burdened." This proof would be required in a court of law. It would be required after the gay or lesbian person hired a lawyer and filed a civil suit against the business, and it would be required during the trial.

You have written far too many times to count, not without reason, about the excessive litigation in this country. Woe is the business forced to defend frivolous lawsuits. The poor businesses more often than not just throw their hands up and settle rather than expend the time and money fighting. This page has written that the tort bar and government know this, which is why so-called legal extortion is so prevalent.

Yes, Illinois has its own version of the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act. But Illinois also has parallel laws that prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation. Not only does Indiana not have a parallel law prohibiting such discrimination, but enacting such a protection is not "on the agenda" of Gov. Mike Pence, as he told ABC News.

Robert Foltman

Oak Forest, Ill.

---

Indiana Gov. Pence attempts to put lipstick on a pig when he writes, "If I saw a restaurant owner refuse to serve a gay couple, I wouldn't eat there anymore" ("Ensuring Religious Freedom in Indiana," op-ed, March 31). Note what Gov. Pence did not say: A business refusing service on the basis of sexual orientation is or should be illegal in Indiana. You're not fooling anyone, Mr. Pence. We read you loud and clear.

Karen Ojerholm

Wexford, Pa.

---

When one chooses to enter the marketplace, one gives up certain rights when they conflict with the rights of others. If a florist had religious reasons to oppose interracial marriage, would anyone support the denial of services to that couple? I don't think anyone in the political mainstream would, yet that doesn't seem true for gay couples. Religious freedoms need to be balanced against other rights, like being treated equally and with basic decency. RFRAs, without offsetting gay protections, fail to do this.

I should state that I am a 22-year-old Republican who just happens to be gay. I am glad Mike Pence and other Republicans want to fight for religious rights; that is critical as many religions are under attack in society. I just want to know why these same Republicans appear wholly uninterested in protecting my rights.

Scott Ruesterholz

New York

---

Years ago, an enthusiastic young man entered my wife's sign shop requesting a banner that read: "Show Me Your Boobs." He was provisioning for spring break. My wife politely refused, stating, "I'm a mom of two daughters, and your sign seems demeaning to me." She had not discriminated against the young man personally, but declined his business based on a mom's conviction.

People should never be denied service based on their race, gender, creed or sexual preference. Anyone walking into a restaurant, department store, supermarket or any place of business should receive equal treatment.

However, there's an equally necessary safeguard on the flip side of this coin. No person or private organization should be forced to participate in a practice he or she finds objectionable. A Jewish business owner should not be compelled by law to make banners for a neo-Nazi event, nor a LGBT merchant obligated to post "one man, one-woman flyers."

The distinction here is subtle but important. The first example is rejection of the person. Society should and does protect against this type of discrimination. The second is abstention from an activity or action based on conviction or belief. This is foundational to the first amendment tenets of free speech and religion.

Indiana's Religious Freedom Act should be unnecessary under our constitutional protections. Discrimination is unconstitutional under the 14th Amendment. Forced participation against one's conviction is equally unconstitutional under the First Amendment. These should enable reasonable people to accommodate one another.

Timothy Brown

Lombard, Ill.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service
