Sheldon Silver’s Lawyers Again Ask Judge to Drop Indictment

Lawyers for State Assemblyman Sheldon Silver made a new request on Thursday that a judge dismiss the indictment against him, arguing that the conduct he is accused of “simply does not amount to any federal offense.”

“This prosecution is a theory in search of a crime,” Mr. Silver’s lawyers wrote, contending that the charges against him failed to meet the standards required under a federal extortion statute and a law governing the theft of honest services, which was narrowed five years ago by the United States Supreme Court.

“At bottom,” his lawyers said in a brief filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, “what the government objects to in this case is not actual federal crimes but rather longstanding features of New York state government that the U.S. attorney finds distasteful.”

The motion follows a defense request in February that charges be dismissed on grounds that Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, had prejudiced Mr. Silver’s case by orchestrating a “media firestorm” that deprived the legislator of the presumption of innocence.

The government has asked Judge Valerie E. Caproni to deny that request, saying Mr. Bharara emphasized repeatedly in public statements that the charges were only allegations and “explicitly stated that the defendant was presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.” Judge Caproni has not yet ruled on that motion.

Mr. Bharara’s office, which had no comment on the latest filing, is expected to respond in court papers.

Mr. Silver, 71, a Democrat from the Lower East Side of Manhattan, was forced to step down as the Assembly speaker after his arrest in January. He has pleaded not guilty to an indictment that charges two counts of honest services fraud and one of extortion under color of official right.

Prosecutors have said Mr. Silver exploited his position to obtain nearly $4 million in corrupt payments through two law firms over the last 15 years, while portraying the money as obtained legitimately from practicing law. The government, for example, has accused him of providing state grants to a doctor who referred lucrative asbestos cases to a personal injury law firm, Weitz & Luxenberg, where Mr. Silver worked.

The defense lawyers, Steven F. Molo and Joel Cohen, wrote that the referrals were “just recommendations, not the sort of transferable property” that is required under the law.

Mr. Silver’s alleged conduct also did not reach the required level of a bribe under the honest services law, the lawyers said.

“Despite all the U.S. attorney’s rhetoric about bribes and kickbacks,” they wrote, “there simply is nothing wrong with an attorney earning referral fees for the business he brings in.”

* Prosecutor Denies Creating a ‘Media Firestorm’ Over Sheldon Silver’s Arrest

* Sheldon Silver’s Lawyers Criticize U.S. Attorney

* Sheldon Silver, Former Assembly Speaker, Is Indicted
