China Charges Zhou Yongkang With Bribery; The former member of the Communist Party’s Politburo was expelled from the party in December

BEIJING—Prosecutors charged China's powerful former security chief with bribery, abuse of power and leaking state secrets, formalizing Communist Party accusations against the most senior figure yet to be targeted in Beijing's sweeping corruption crackdown.

The official Xinhua News Agency said Friday prosecutors alleged Zhou Yongkang took advantage of his position to seek benefits for others and illegally accepted other people's “very valuable" property. They alleged he also intentionally disclosed state secrets, Xinhua said, without elaborating.

The alleged misdeeds took place while Mr. Zhou was a member of the Communist Party's Politburo Standing Committee, its most powerful decision-making body, according to Xinhua. But Xinhua said the 72-year-old committed his alleged crimes throughout much of his career, including his stint as a top executive at state-run oil giant China National Petroleum Corp. as well as his time as a senior party official in China's southwestern Sichuan province.

“The state and its people suffered heavy losses and a negative social impact," Xinhua said.

Mr. Zhou has been unavailable for comment. He was ousted from the party in December amid a probe into potential violations of party discipline, which in China is usually a euphemism for corruption.

A Wall Street Journal investigation last year found that Mr. Zhou's family members and friends forged business ties with China National Petroleum and amassed holdings in the petroleum, investment and media sectors valued at tens of millions of dollars.

No Chinese political figure as senior as Mr. Zhou has faced criminal charges since the group known as the Gang of Four was tried in the early 1980s for its role in the Cultural Revolution, the radical political movement of the 1960s and 70s.

Mr. Zhou retired as one of then-nine members of the Standing Committee in 2012, when the Communist Party elevated Xi Jinping as its top official and installed a new slate of leaders. Mr. Zhou was once seen as untouchable because his responsibilities included overseeing China's police, courts and intelligence agencies.

But Mr. Zhou's standing was seen as weakened in 2012, when Chinese prosecutors accused another senior politician and political ally, Bo Xilai, of bribery, embezzlement and abuse of power. Mr. Bo was convicted two years ago.

Despite persistent hints, particularly in China's state-run media, that Mr. Zhou would be accused of political crimes such as leading a clique that could tear apart the party, the charges hewed more tightly to economic and legal malfeasance.

Just last month, China's Supreme People's Court, in its annual work report, criticized alleged political activities by both Mr. Zhou and Mr. Bo that it suggested risked undermining the party. The report alleged “severe harm of actions like trampling on the rule of law, violating the party's unity, engaging in unauthorized political activities" by the pair.

Political analyst Andrew Wedeman at Georgia State University said the basic allegations against Mr. Zhou were expected, though it is not clear how to interpret the state-secret charges. Answering questions by email, Mr. Wedeman said that despite hints otherwise, he had doubted Mr. Xi would risk a “political trial" of Mr. Zhou since there was little evidence of a conspiracy and it was also safer to limit allegations to economic-related crimes.

Mr. Xi is overseeing a campaign that has detained hundreds of officials since he took power and vowed to target both “tigers and flies," meaning senior leaders as well as junior bureaucrats. Some political insiders and analysts say Mr. Xi is using China's anticorruption campaign to purge the party's upper ranks of potential rivals.

Prosecutors brought the charges in a court in the northeastern Chinese city of Tianjin, Xinhua said. The news agency said Mr. Zhou has access to legal counsel.

James T. Areddy contributed to this article.

Write to William Kazer at william.kazer@wsj.com
