Footballer loses anonymity in sex trial

A Manchester United footballer who had a one-night stand with a fitness instructor has lost a legal battle to keep his identity secret after she was wrongly depicted in court as a blackmailer.

Marcos Rojo, 25, who has a longterm partner and a two-year-old daughter, engaged in sexual activity with Sarah Watson, 34, after meeting her at a Christmas party at a club in central Manchester last December.

Mr Rojo, a defender who played in the 2014 World Cup final for Argentina, had previously been granted an anonymity order after his lawyers told a court hearing that Ms Watson had demanded £100,000 not to publish a "kiss and tell" story in a tabloid newspaper.

However, last month Mr Justice Warby ruled that the court had not been given all the facts and said the anonymity order should be lifted.

The injunction, identifying Mr Rojo only by the letters YXB, had previously been granted after a court was told that Ms Watson had tried to blackmail the star.

However, Mr Justice Warby said that it had been the footballer's representatives who had attempted to "buy off" Ms Watson after she revealed that she had signed an agreement with The Sun newspaper to describe her encounter.

The judge said that Mr Rojo had "not shown any great concern about privacy for his sexual conduct" and that there were "strong grounds for inferring" that the anonymity order had been sought largely for commercial reasons. He ordered Mr Rojo to pay the instructor's estimated £35,000 legal costs.

In an interview with The Mail on Sunday, Ms Watson said the case had been a "total nightmare", describing how she lost weight and struggled to sleep as she fought to clear her name.

"These guys are like spoiled rich kids. They are overpaid, oversexed and have a sense of entitlement," she said.

After meeting Mr Rojo at a nightclub in Manchester on December 15 last year, she was invited back to a party at a flat belonging to a friend of his, Kristian Bereit.

She alleged that Mr Bereit, a personal shopper at Selfridge's in Manchester, "asked me how much it would cost for me to have sex with Marcos". She said: "I told him I was not a prostitute."

Later that evening, Ms Watson performed a sex act on the defender, which was witnessed by four other players. She and Mr Rojo did not meet again but she said he later sent explicit messages and photos to her, including a video of himself masturbating.

Ms Watson said she was later approached by a tabloid newspaper and accepted an offer to publish a "kiss and tell" story, worth £30,000, later reduced to £17,500 and ultimately never paid.After the newspaper contacted the football club, Ms Watson was asked to meet Mr Bereit at a Manchester hotel where he told her she could get out of the contract with The Sun.

She alleged that he kept saying "what do you want? Money is no object" and that, after making phone calls, "he whispered to her "£100,000" to which she said, "yes, OK".

Mr Bereit later made a taped phone call in the presence of Mr Rojo's agent and an unnamed representative of Manchester United in which he said £100,000 wasn't possible and asked for "a ball park as to what you want".

Ms Watson replied: "Why don't you tell me what they can offer ... because to be honest I'm getting sick of it now." The application for an anonymity order to protect Mr Rojo was made by his representatives two days later.

"What happened to me shows how wealthy people use injunctions to bully poor people. It is a small mistake that has caused me so much pain and anguish," Ms Watson said.

Mr Bereit declined to comment when contacted by The Mail on Sunday. Manchester United said: "It's not something the club would want to comment on, and the player is not available for comment."
