'Sarawak BN integrity pledge will promote fair elections'

KUALA LUMPUR: The Election Integrity Pledge made by Sarawak Barisan Nasional backbenchers and political secretaries is a move towards greater transparency, said Transparency International Malaysia (TI-Malaysia) president Datuk Akhbar Satar.

"The signing of this Election Integrity Pledge will promote a clean and fair election process and reduce corruption in the upcoming state elections.

"It will go a long way to address abusive practices during the election and well after," he said, adding that Prime Minister Datuk Seri Najib Razak and some politicians were past signatories.

"This pledge comes at a vital time, as we are now, more than ever, living in an age of growing public awareness of the devastating effects of corruption.

"The increasing involvement of civil society in fighting corruption will spur the public to be more vigilant in monitoring the performance of their leaders.

"The voluntary pledge requires candidates to open a social media account (such as Facebook or Twitter) in order to promote direct communication and interaction between politicians and civil society."

He also said it was time for political factions to uphold the Election Offences Act.

He added that TI-Malaysia had continuously urged greater transparency and accountability by seeking full public disclosure of assets of elected and public officials.

"There is nothing to fear in making a public declaration of assets if one has no ill-gotten or unexplained wealth.

"In this regard, the Anti-Corruption Advisory Board and Parliament's bipartisan Special Committee against Corruption have proposed that the Commission be given more bite to compel relevant officials and persons to declare their assets.

"This will require an amendment to Section 36 of the Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission (MACC) Act 2009 to compel an individual in certain circumstances to declare his finances or assets without the MACC first launching a formal corruption investigation."

TI-Malaysia launched the pledge during the last elections to encourage candidates to make a public declaration of their commitment towards "observing the principles of truth, integrity, accountability and ethical conduct" during the elections and after being voted into office.

( END )
