He who sits at Xi’s right hand

The most feared man in China — who was ultimately responsible for last Friday’s bold charging of the country’s former security tsar Zhou Yongkang with corruption, abuse of power and leaking state secrets — is a professorial figure whose expertise is in economics.

Wang Qishan, 66, the son of an engineering professor, has ­become the right hand of President Xi Jinping, who is in turn the country’s most dominant leader since Mao Zedong.

He is managing China’s ­relentless anti-corruption purge, urging on investigators to adopt “shock and awe” tactics as they arrive in provincial centres, telling them to be “frightening”. He has established a new unit to inspect the inspectors themselves.

He and Mr Xi have remained the closest of friends since they were “sent down to the countryside” as young men during the Cultural Revolution.

They were sent to Yan’an in Shaanxi province, sharing tough times, working manually side by side and at times having to sleep in the same bed, as Cheng Li, the director of the John L. Thornton China Centre at the Brookings Institution, told The Australian.

Mr Xi’s father, Xi Zhongxun, was one of the communist party’s eight immortals, placing him at the forefront of the princelings who now control the party’s leading heights.

Mr Wang too joined the informal princeling faction — though in his case, through marriage. His wife, Yao Mingshan, is the daughter of former vice premier Yao Yilin.

At first after graduating in ­history, Mr Wang worked in the elite Chinese Academy of Social ­Sciences, gradually shifting to policy research, before becoming at 45, governor of the China ­Construction Bank, one of the country’s giant “pillar” banks.

He went on to found the country’s first investment bank, China International Capital Corporation, becoming its inaugural executive chairman.

Sent to Guangdong province that borders Hong Kong, as executive vice-governor, he managed a potential disaster over a wave of non-performing loans during the Asian financial crisis, then took over as Beijing mayor when SARS struck the capital, managing down that crisis too.

Professor Li said Mr Wang, “a brilliant economic ­technocrat, is quite cosmopolitan, working closely with overseas ­figures, and with a relatively deep understanding of Western ­systems”.

He joined the Politburo in 2007, became a vice-premier a year later, chaired the strategic and economic dialogue with the US, and then in late 2012 was elevated to the country’s top decision-making body, the seven-man Politburo Standing Committee.

It was widely expected that in this role, he would lead China’s renewed efforts towards economic reform.

Instead, this task has chiefly been assigned to Premier Li ­Keqiang, while Mr Wang was appointed secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, the party’s corruption-busting body, and also later as head of the Central Leading Group for Inspection Work.

This surprise appointment led some analysts to ask whether Mr Wang had in effect been demoted to a minor role.

It soon became clear, however, that Mr Xi had entrusted him with the key role in his administration, as the anti-corruption campaign swiftly took centre stage.

“Wang Qishan was given the most important, most difficult and challenging job — that of saving the party as it faced, in the wake of many issues including the Bo Xilai scandal, a terrible legitimacy crisis,” Professor Li said.

Mr Xi needed to place in that role a person whom he could trust implicitly. And a person who was fearless.

This involved Mr Xi drawing on different qualities from those more conventionally ascribed to Mr Wang — but qualities of toughness and persistence that he well knew Mr Wang possessed.

“Mr Wang’s friendship with Mr Xi, which dates back more than 45 years, is therefore very important,” Professor Li said.

“Mr Wang and President Xi have really made a lot of enemies” — with China’s own media ­reporting that more than 270,000 cadres — both heavyweight ­“tigers” like Zhou Yongkang, and also many lower level “flies” — have been charged, including more than 40 people at ministerial level or above, and 16 senior People’s Liberation Army ­officers.It has been said in China that it helped that Mr Wang and Ms Yao have no offspring — and are thus invulnerable to that terrible ­potential source of threat from corrupt targets of investigation to one’s children.
