Bank was told of bribery probe

A former IT chief at the Commonwealth Bank, Michael Harte, alerted his new employer at British bank Barclays to the bribery investigation enveloping his former colleagues prior to the story becoming public but has not yet been interviewed by police in relation to the matter.

Two of Mr Harte’s former colleagues at CBA, Chris Hunter and Jon Waldron, were charged by NSW police with bribery ­offences.

It followed a joint investigation with the FBI into payments of $US2.1 million from a Californian IT company, allegedly in return for being awarded lucrative contracts by the bank that did not go to tender.

Mr Hunter was CBA’s head of IT operations while Mr Waldron was the bank’s former manager of IT engineering. Both men reported to Mr Harte in his role as chief information officer. Mr Hunter, who worked closely with Mr Harte, was reportedly considered a possible replacement for Mr Harte when he left to join Barclays last year.

Mr Hunter and Mr Waldron were fired from their roles at CBA late last year after the bank allegedly noticed suspicious payments into the two men’s ­accounts.

There is no suggestion of wrongdoing on Mr Harte’s behalf.

NSW Police allege that while restructuring the bank’s IT services, Mr Waldron and Mr Hunter received a total of $US2.1m in payments from California-based ServiceMesh in return for providing the company with “tens of millions of dollars” worth of contracts.

Mr Hunter, a 61-year-old American, was arrested at his Sydney home on March 18, while Mr Waldron, a 44-year-old New Zealander, handed himself in to police, on the advice of his lawyer, after returning from the US .

The much-lauded restructure of the CBA IT systems took place under the control of Mr Harte, who moved to London last year to take up a role with Barclays Bank as chief operations and technology officer and now sits on the bank’s prestigious executive committee.

While Barclays would not publicly comment on the matter, The Australian understands from sources familiar with the situation at the British bank that Mr Harte alerted Barclays to the matter prior to Mr Hunter’s and Mr Waldron’s arrest last month.

It is also understood that British financial regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority, contacted Barclays after the story of the arrests broke in The Australian to make it aware of the situation and whether it was able to provide any information on the matter. Barclays is understood to have expressed its full confidence in Mr Harte, who underwent a rigorous due diligence check before taking up his role. While it is understood that several current and former CBA executives have been interviewed about the matter, police have not yet asked to speak to Mr Harte. Mr Harte is in New Zealand for the Easter break.

ServiceMesh, the US company allegedly at the centre of the scandal, has not been a supplier to Barclays, but its parent company CSC was in years past. ServiceMesh is a California-based start-up headed by Eric Pulier that was bought by US computing giant Computer Services Corporation for about $US325m in 2013. It is alleged that the two men received payments after ServiceMesh was sold to CSC.

Mr Hunter and Mr Waldron remain on bail after appearing briefly in court last week.CSC last week confirmed that Mr Pulier has been stood down from his role pending the criminal investigation by NSW Police and the FBI.
