Military hospital head replaced as he takes swipe against critics

THE FORMER commander of Armed Forces of the Philippines Medical Center (AFPMC) on Monday hit back at the people behind his removal, insisting his innocence amid claims of anomalies and corruption during his tenure.

In his farewell speech during the institution's change of command ceremony, Brig. Gen. Normando T. Sta. Ana, Jr. took a swipe at his critics and even urged them to just help improve the military-run hospital.

"Sa mga nagagalit sa akin, bakit nga ba? Ano bang ikinagagalit nyo? Sa mga naiinggit sa akin, sorry na lang kayo. Sa mga naninira sa akin, itigil nyo na yan. Sumama na lang kayo sa pagbabago at pag-unlad ng medical center. Dinadamay nyo pa pati kami (Why are those angry at me continue to be so? What is the matter with you? To those who envy me, I am sorry. To those who are out to destroy me, cut it out. Just help me bring development to the medical center. Don't bring us down)," he said.

The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) currently has an ongoing probe on the allegations of anomalous purchase of medicines and supplies during the three-year term of Brig. Gen. Sta. Ana.

An anonymous letter sent last year to the AFP Chief-of-Staff and Ombudsman triggered the investigation and eventually the dismissal of Mr. Sta. Ana. The letter alleged that P80 million worth of materials procured by the hospital were either overpriced or undelivered. - Jauhn Etienne Villaruel

The relieved commander admitted he was "hurt" that an anonymous letter led to his sacking from the medical center's top post.

"Mas maganda kung sa level natin, magpakilala sila. Sabihin nila yung mga akala nila mali. Maiayos natin. Hindi yung sisiraan nila na hindi sila nagpapakilala. (It would have been better if they introduced themselves and identified what they thought was wrong. We could have fixed it. Instead of destroying me anonymously)," he said during an ambush interview.

The sacked military official, in the same interview, also mentioned that both people from inside and outside the AFPMC were behind his dismissal.

"Habang inaayos natin ang procurement system, may mga nasagasaan na hindi maganda ang ginagawa. So ayaw nilang mawala yun at gusto nilang magpatuloy ang kanilang katiwalian. So gumawa sila ng paraan para maalis ako dito (Some people's toes got stepped on while we were fixing the procurement system because they were up to no good. So they wanted to continue what they were doing and they came up with ways to take me out of office)," he said.

Meanwhile, the turnover of leadership marks the beginning of Col. Joseph M. Acosta's tenure as the hospital's head. The newly appointed commander of AFPMC promised to continue the changes initiated by his predecessors.

"It is only through consistency and coherence overtime through multiple generations of leadership that we get maximum results. This is the kind of leadership that I would like to put to help transform (AFPMC)," Col. Acosta stated in his speech.

<http://goo.gl/asoKQm> 
