Border force tipped to keep corruption at bay

A corruption watchdog has backed the creation of an “Australian border force” to address the threat of “illicit goods and illegal visitors’’, saying it is an important initiative to “mitigate corruption risk’’.

The federal government plans to establish the agency from July 1, taking over the border protection responsibilities of the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service.

The Australian border force agency will be part of the existing Department of Immigration and Border Protection. Customs will be fully integrated into the department. The legislation to enact the shake-up is before a senate inquiry, which is due to report next month.

The Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity — which detects and prevents corrupt conduct in the nation’s law enforcement agencies such as the Australian Federal Police and the Australian Crime Commission — has backed the agency and enhanced integrity measures.

“The proposals to strengthen the integrity arrangements of DIBP are occurring against a backdrop of changes in the operating and risk environments relating to the border,’’ the corruption watchdog says in a submission to the senate inquiry.

“The then integrity commissioner’s final report into Operation Heritage/Marca at Sydney International Airport (2014) supported the Australian border force concept as an important integrity initiative to mitigate corruption risk. That investigation was one of the largest anti-corruption operations in Australia in recent years and to date has resulted in criminal proceedings against 26 people relating to the large-scale importation of narcotics worth more than $46 million.’’ Operation Heritage/Marca was a joint investigation between the integrity commission and the AFP into the involvement of commonwealth officials in a drug importation ring operating at Sydney International Airport.

The government’s legislation to establish the Australian border force proposes that all Immigration and Border Protection workers may be required to undergo alcohol and drug tests to “increase resistance to corruption’’. Customs officers are already subjected to tests.

The focus will be on operational and high-risk areas but anyone working in the department could be randomly selected for testing.

In its submission, the corruption watchdog warns Australia is among the world’s most lucrative illicit drug markets and cites figures from the UN Office on Drugs and Crime showing that the selling price of 1kg of ice is $7000 in China, $100,000 in the US and up to $320,000 in Australia.“These high profits are enabling the growth in organisational capability of crime groups operating in Australia, including the increased involvement of transnational crime groups with the potential to use aggressive methods and actively seek out corruption opportunities,’’ it says, adding that alcohol and drug testing acts as a deterrent.
