Concerns over anti-graft body's selection team

JAKARTA - The Indonesian government's recent announcement of a plan to form a selection team to recruit new Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK) leaders for the next five years has led to concerns that the team will be filled by figures who resent the anti-graft body for its bold moves in handling graft cases.

The Anti-corruption Study Centre (Pukat) at Gadjah Mada University in Yogyakarta said on Sunday that filling the team with figures it deemed as "KPK detractors" would compromise the quality of the future KPK commissioners set to serve from this year until 2019.

The anti-graft watchdog's statement came amid speculation that the Law and Human Rights Ministry, which is now led by ruling Indonesian Democratic Party-Struggle (PDI-P) politician Yasona Laoly, was considering recommending one-time graft convict and Padjajaran University law expert Romli Atmasasmita as chairman of the team.

During the KPK and the National Police stand-off in February, Mr Romli appeared antagonistic towards the KPK by defending then National Police chief candidate Budi Gunawan, who was named a bribery suspect by the KPK in January.

Commander Gunawan was later dropped by President Joko Widodo, who then named General Badrodin Haiti instead as the interim National Police chief.

"The figures who will be tasked with selecting new KPK commissioners should not hate the KPK... (The President) should not appoint people who want to undermine the country's anti-graft efforts," Pukat director Zainal Arifin Mochtar said on Sunday.

The KPK has been severely weakened in recent months following a tit-for-tat feud with the police that led to an overhaul of the agency's leaders.

Former KPK adviser Abdulla Hehamahua also called on the President not to appoint candidates affiliated with political parties as the KPK was currently investigating graft cases involving political elites.

"The team should comprise academicians. The team members' integrity and track records must be thoroughly examined by the government," Mr Abdullah said.

THE JAKARTA POST/ASIA NEWS NETWORK
