 Power and oil executives netted in SOE graft probe 

A pair of senior executives at two state-owned enterprises came under graft investigation yesterday as the corruption crackdown on national companies widened.

China Southern Power Grid vice-president Xiao Peng committed “duty-related crimes”, according to provincial prosecutors in Guangdong, where the company is headquartered.

Wu Zhenfang, former vice-general manager of China National Offshore Oil Corporation, was being probed for “suspected serious violations of party discipline”, the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection said.

Both terms are euphemisms for corruption, and no further details were given.

Xiao, 59, was in charge of the power firm’s planning department, which coordinates with local governments and sets prices for power transmission. The firm distributes power in five southern provinces under electricity monopoly State Grid.

He joined China Southern Power Grid in 2002 and enjoyed table tennis and calligraphy. Caixin.com cited company insiders as saying people exploited Xiao’s hobbies for graft.

Xiao is the fourth of the firm’s executives to be snared since last month, when the CCDI started inspecting the company. On Monday, another vice-president, Qi Dacai, was also detained and put under investigation.

Wu, 63, retired as vice-general manager of CNOOC, one of the country’s three oil giants, two years ago. He was in charge of liquefied natural gas projects in four provinces.

Wu was also an independent director of another state-owned firm, Chinalco, the country’s biggest aluminium producer.

Yesterday’s two separate announcements about Xiao and Wu came after news was released last month that three other top SOE executives had been put under investigation. They were China National Petroleum Corporation Liao Yongyuan , carmaker FAW Group chairman Xu Jianyi and Baosteel Group vice-president Cui Jian.

Chief graft-buster Wang Qishan had earlier said this year’s first round of inspections would focus on the nation’s 26 top SOEs.
