N.J. SENATOR PLEADS NOT GUILTY

NEWARK, N.J. - Sen. Bob Menendez pleaded not guilty Thursday in federal court in Newark to charges that he exploited his political influence to gain luxury vacations, golf outings, campaign donations and inexpensive flights.

Mr. Menendez, D-N.J., was charged with eight bribery counts, each of which carries a possible sentence of 15 years in prison. Judge William H. Walls released Mr. Menendez on his own recognizance.

The charges stem from Mr. Menendez's relationship with Salomon E. Melgen, a wealthy Florida eye surgeon and political benefactor. Dr. Melgen, who resisted appeals by the Justice Department to testify against his friend, also pleaded not guilty to bribery charges Thursday at U.S. District Court in Newark.

Attorney general pick

WASHINGTON -President Barack Obama's choice of Loretta Lynch to be the next U.S. attorney general got a boost on Thursday when Republican Sen. Mark Kirk of Illinois announced his support, possibly providing a crucial 51st vote for the embattled nominee.

All 44 Senate Democrats and two independents are expected to vote for Ms. Lynch, who would be the first African-American woman to head the Justice Department.

Most Republicans are planning to vote against her to protest Mr. Obama's November executive order easing the threat of deportation against 4.7 million undocumented immigrants.

Bomb charges added

ST. LOUIS - Two men affiliated with the New Black Panther Party, who were indicted last fall on federal weapons charges, are now accused of trying to use bombs in a plot to carry out "violent acts" during protests in Ferguson, Mo., according to officials and documents made public Thursday.

The newest indictment, handed up by a federal grand jury Wednesday, has charged Olajuwon Ali Davis and Brandon Orlando Baldwin, both 22.

Florida prison plot

GAINESVILLE, Fla. - Three Ku Klux Klan members who worked at a Florida prison have been charged with plotting to kill a black inmate after his release in retaliation for a fight, officials said Thursday.

The three men - Thomas Jordan Driver, 25, David Elliot Moran, 47, and Charles Thomas Newcomb, 42 - each were arrested Thursday on one state count of conspiracy to commit murder.

Also in the nation

In a bid to keep millionaire Robert A. Durst from having to face felony weapons and drug charges in New Orleans, his lawyers on Thursday sought to call the agents who arrested him as witnesses, part of their broader effort to prove that evidence collected at the time of the arrest was obtained illegally and cannot be used against him. ... A New York police detective was transferred from the department's elite Joint Terrorism Task Force on Wednesday after a video showing him screaming at an Uber driver over an alleged traffic violation went viral online, police said.
