Biggest of Chinese ‘tigers’ charged

Zhou Yongkang, the fiercest of the “tigers” — the once-untouchable heavyweight targets — of China’s anti-corruption campaign, was charged yesterday with corruption, abuse of power and leaking state secrets.

He faces the death penalty, ­although it is likely to be suspended if he co-operates with the authorities.

Mr Zhou is a former member of the Politburo Standing Committee, China’s peak decision-making body, serving alongside his nemesis of today, President Xi Jinping, and was from 2007-12 the feared head of the nation’s domestic security apparatus.

He is the most powerful politician to face criminal charges since the arrest in 1976 of the Gang of Four who presided over the Cultural Revolution alongside Mao Zedong.

The few other comparable leaders to be brought down, such as party chief Zhao Ziyang, did not face public trials — which will be Mr Zhou’s fate, probably within the next few months.

Mr Xi has been tackling, to massive popular applause, not only “flies” — lower level cadres — but also such “tigers”.

Mr Zhou, 72, began his working career as an oilfield technician, becoming head of the China National Petroleum Corporation in 1996, and dominated China’s oil and gas industry together with his family and friends, until he was placed under investigation in late 2013.

He also served as minister of land and natural resources, and as Communist Party secretary — and thus the most powerful leader — of vast Sichuan province. With a population of 87 million, it is bigger than any European ­nation. As security chief he tied diminishing the number of petitions to the career and financial advancement of local officials — leading them to hire thugs and private ­security firms to intimidate ­petitioners, and to set up “black jails” to hold those with grievances against provincial and city authorities.

His downfall is linked with that of Bo Xilai, with whom he was associated politically.

Mr Zhou praised Bo’s harsh approach to law and order in Chongqing municipality when Bo became party chief there, and he is said to have been the sole voice on the Politburo Standing Committee opposed to sacking Bo from all his public positions in 2012. Bo was jailed for life, after his wife Gu Kailai was given a ­suspended death sentence for murdering British business fixer Neil Heywood.

A Communist Party investigation into Mr Zhou began in ­August 2013. Other family members were taken into custody, ­including son Zhou Bin and daughter-in-law Huang Wan.

A year ago, Reuters reported that assets worth $19 billion had been seized from Zhou’s family and networks.

The party investigation for ­“violations of party discipline” was formalised last July.

Xinhua announced at its conclusion on December 5 last year that Mr Zhou had been expelled from the party since it was established that he took “large amounts in bribes personally and through his family and associates, abused his power to further the interests of his family, mistresses and associates, committed adultery with multiple women, and engaged in the exchange of money and favours for sex, and leaked state and party secrets”.

The latter is believed to refer to the illegal tapping of phone ­conversations of top leaders, or discreetly providing information to media about the business ­activities of rival politicians and their families.

No longer a party member, Mr Zhou then became susceptible to criminal charges, now brought. He has remained in custody at a secret location for about 19 months.

His trial will take place in the large northern port city of ­Tianjin.But although Mr Zhou’s downfall is being widely cheered in China, the court case may be less open to the media than that of Bo, who gained public support through his unbowed demeanour at his trial in August 2013, when he denied all charges.
