World News: Corruption Trial Holds Risks for Beijing

SHANGHAI -- China's high-reaching anticorruption campaign is heading toward its next phase -- prosecution -- carrying risks for the leadership to prove allegations that have mounted without much evidence for two years.

Prosecutors announced the criminal indictment Friday of Zhou Yongkang, formerly one of the nine most senior officials in the ruling Communist Party. Chinese President Xi Jinping has pursued an anticorruption campaign that has remade politics and that at times seemed to disproportionately focus on Mr. Zhou and people around him.

The prosecutors, in the northern port city of Tianjin, said through the official Xinhua News Agency that a court accepted their indictment of the 72-year-old Mr. Zhou on charges of bribery, abusing power and leaking state secrets. The charges, not spelled out in detail publicly, come eight months after Mr. Xi's ruling Central Committee announced an investigation into Mr. Zhou.

The news agency said Mr. Zhou has been advised by a lawyer it didn't name. Mr. Zhou, who has been unavailable for comment, hasn't been seen in public since October 2013.

The anticorruption campaign China's president has pursued since a transition that included Mr. Zhou's retirement is unprecedented, in part because it has targeted officials as high ranking as Mr. Zhou, the most senior party member charged with crime since the 1970s. China's top court recently said 28 senior officials with a rank at the provincial or ministerial level or higher were investigated last year for corruption, including Mr. Zhou, compared with 30 during the four-year period before the 2012 political transition.

Yet none has appeared in court nor made any public statements, and the detailed accusations against them haven't been publicly released.

While the indictment of Mr. Zhou suggests his trial will be held soon, analysts said, the public airing of more specific charges risks uncomfortable questions for Mr. Xi and other party leaders.

The August 2013 trial of another former leader, Bo Xilai, included edited transcripts and video footage. The actual charges, that Mr. Bo accepted bribes of less than $3 million, failed to impress many in the public after months of publicity from state media about a historic prosecution. Mr. Bo denied the charges but was sentenced to life in prison.

Mr. Zhou is virtually assured to receive a guilty verdict given his political significance, and analysts said it could include a death sentence.

"The deal has been made," said Huang Jing, a professor in Singapore at Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy.

The chief question is why the party elevated Mr. Zhou, a former farm boy from eastern China, through a career that included running the country's largest oil company, one of its most populous provinces and finally a seat in the inner circle of leadership. There, he presided over a state security apparatus that approximates the combined power of the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, police forces, courts, prosecutors and prisons. Mr. Zhou violated laws virtually throughout his career, according to the indictment summary made public Friday by Xinhua that alleges his illegal activity spanned as much as two decades.

"Moving to the cleanup phase will also begin to bring out a lot of detail on what these upper officials were involved in," said Andrew Wedeman, a professor of political science at Georgia State University.

An illustration of the public hunger for detail emerged this week. An obscure government website was inundated with reader interest after it published a speech delivered by a midlevel prosecutor in northern Hebei Province, Han Xiaoning, who described the breadth of the campaign -- and tallied a trove of the riches it has turned up.

"Nowhere is off limits in fighting tigers and there's no blind spot in fighting flies," Mr. Han said, recounting allegations against accused officials who, he said, accumulated hundreds of millions of yuan, tens of kilograms of gold, Swiss watches, Chinese paintings and extensive property, which in the case of one general included a mansion in the shape of a pistol.

In "The Governance of China," a compilation of Mr. Xi's speeches published in recent months, he said it has been known since ancient times that "Employing capable officials represents the top priority of governance." While Mr. Xi said the party has "done a good job" with its personnel decisions, "there are still some problems which, if not properly resolved, will demoralize both the party members and the general public."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service
