 Officials eye jobs in private sector 

Mainland public servants look towards greener pastures as stepped-up corruption crackdown puts their ‘iron rice bowl’ careers at risk

Mainland public servants are flocking to apply for jobs in the private sector as the Communist Party’s anti-graft drive erodes perks and job security, according to a human resources website.

More than 10,000 government officials have submitted their resumes to potential employers through Beijing-based jobs website Zhaopin.com since the traditional job-hunting season started in February, according to a report by the website.

This was over 30 per cent more than the same period last year, with public servants now topping the list of jobseekers. The first working week after the Lunar New Year is the mainland’s peak hiring season.

“Previously we didn’t pay attention to this group since very few officials quit their jobs. But it’s a major phenomenon this year. So many of them want to change jobs,” the website’s senior career consultant, Huang Ruoshan , said.

Many officials were looking for jobs at property developers, financial institutions and internet-related firms, she said.

In the past, Chinese society had been obsessed with careers in the civil service, with success rates for applicants as low as one position for every 87 candidates. In 2010, 1.6 million people competed for just 16,000 openings.

But the numbers have dropped in recent years. Last year, 1.4 million people applied for 22,000 vacancies, Huashang Daily reported.

Huang said President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign had left many mid-level government officials worried for their career, once deemed an “iron rice bowl”.

Under the crackdown, perks had been cut and even the officials’ jobs were hanging in the balance, she said. “These officials … hope to leverage the work experience and social networks gained from their time in the government,” Huang said.

Young public servants with less than five years of work experience were also actively seeking new jobs, said Jennifer Feng Lijuan from human resources services provider 51job.com.

The trend could be because officials’ salaries were now more transparent, their performance appraisals more stringent and their career prospects not as certain as before, Feng said.

Reforms to the civil servants’ pension system also meant they would receive less money after retirement.

“Jobs in the civil service are no longer as attractive,” she said.

Officials with professional knowledge or who were familiar with private enterprises would find job-hopping easier than those who handled merely administrative affairs, Feng said.

Grass-roots officials were the worst off, receiving the lowest pay yet shouldering the greatest workload and highest pressure, said Jiang Ying , vice-director of a district finance affairs office in a second-tier city in Zhejiang province.

“We have only five days of annual leave and most of us don’t even dare to take it, fearing that our bosses will be unhappy,” Jiang, 30, said. She said she had been toying with the idea of getting a new job since last year but had yet to find an ideal one.

Harry’s View A10
