Menendez Pleads Not Guilty to Corruption

NEWARK, N.J.—Sen. Robert Menendez pleaded not guilty to corruption charges including bribery Thursday, the day after he was indicted by a federal grand jury. Prosecutors say the New Jersey Democrat accepted nearly $1 million in gifts and campaign contributions from a Florida eye doctor in exchange for political favors.

“These allegations are false and I am confident they will be proven false," Mr. Menendez said in a brief statement at the federal court in Newark. “I look forward to doing so in court."

The appearance was a step in what is likely to be a long legal battle that could turn on the definition of friendship. Prosecutors will have to convince a jury that Mr. Menendez and Salomon Melgen, the doctor who was also indicted on bribery charges, struck explicit deals to trade political favors for cash and lavish trips.

Mr. Menendez and his attorney have said the two men were longtime friends helping each other.

Prosecutors “have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that a 20-year friendship between Sen. Menendez and Dr. Melgen was something else," Mr. Menendez's attorney Abbe Lowell said after the senator entered his plea.

The 61-year-old senator surrendered to authorities at the courthouse but the judge released him without bond, saying he wasn't a flight risk. Mr. Menendez surrendered his personal passport but was allowed to keep his congressional one, which can be used for official travel abroad.

The indictment is the culmination of a more than two-year inquiry by the Federal Bureau of Investigation into the relationship between the senator and Dr. Melgen. On Wednesday, a grand jury handed down a 14-count indictment against Mr. Menendez.

Dr. Melgen was charged with 13 counts in relation to the alleged scheme and pleaded not guilty to the charges Thursday. He was released on $1.5 million bail and had to surrender his passport, private plane and guns, as well as submit to drug testing. Dr. Melgen left the courthouse without speaking to reporters and his lawyer declined to comment. Previously, his attorneys have said he didn't do anything wrong.

During their court appearance on Thursday, Dr. Melgen and Mr. Menendez appeared to make eye contact and smile at each other. The two sat a few feet apart, didn't publicly speak and left at separate times.

Mr. Menendez, who plans to stay in Congress, stepped aside as the top Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on Thursday. His aides also launched a public-relations push in the wake of his indictment, setting up a website featuring a video of the senator's rebuttal, supportive statements from congressional colleagues and a solicitation for contributions.

The charges against Mr. Menendez could change the tenor of Senate Democrats' position on foreign-policy matters at a critical time. An outspoken hawk on issues such as Iran, Mr. Menendez has frequently butted heads with the White House over whether to ratchet up sanctions on Tehran and the U.S. response to Russia's annexation of Crimea.

Democratic leaders offered differing levels of support to Mr. Menendez. A big question will be what role he plays within the Democratic caucus now that he has been indicted.

“Our justice system is premised on the principle of innocent until proven guilty and Senator Menendez should not be judged until he has his day in court," said Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.).

Senate Republicans seized on the allegations. “Sen. Menendez's ethics lapses have long been a distraction to the United States Senate," said Andrea Bozek, spokeswoman for Senate Republicans' campaign arm.

Mr. Lowell said the case would mark another failure for the Justice Department, citing the prosecutions of former Alaska Sen. Ted Stevens and former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards. Mr. Lowell successfully defended Mr. Edwards against charges he misused campaign funds to cover up an affair.

“Prosecutors at the Justice Department often get it wrong," Mr. Lowell said. “These charges are the latest mistakes."

Mr. Lowell prevailed in the Edwards case in part by arguing that the money he received from a wealthy donor was a personal gift from a friend, not a campaign contribution. He pointed to the lack of evidence that the donor intended to use the money to help Mr. Edwards's presidential campaign.

A similar approach could help Mr. Menendez. The indictment handed down Wednesday doesn't describe any explicit deal between the senator and the doctor, though prosecutors could present such evidence in court.
