Political corruption . . . or 'just friends'?

Through the magic of electronic mail, it's never been easier to peer into the grubby side of politics. Last week, a federal grand jury in New Jersey handed down a host of bribery, conspiracy, and fraud charges against US Senator Robert Menendez and his friend and longtime donor, Florida ophthalmologist Salomon Melgen. During a six- month stretch in 2012, the indictment asserts, Melgen gave $600,000 to a super PAC and more than $140,000 to New Jersey Democratic Party entities supporting Menendez's reelection. In that same period, e- mail transcripts suggest, the senator devoted lots of his staffers' time, and his own, to his donor's business problems.

Yet the eye-popping ickiness of certain political transactions is no guarantee they're illegal. Even as e-mail servers give prosecutors more evidence to chew on, the nation's highest courts are defining corruption in ever-narrower terms -- as the explicit "quid pro quo" exchange of favors for specific official acts. By the logic of Citizens United, the watershed 2010 US Supreme Court ruling that helped usher in super PACs, the influx of money into politics is the norm, and Melgen's exorbitant political spending is an expression of his First Amendment rights.

If prosecutors are right, Menendez had a less exalted idea of what Melgen's money meant. In mid-2012, the senator pressed for a meeting with an assistant secretary of state. Why? To discuss port security in the Dominican Republic, a Menendez staffer explained. The State Department pushed back: Why that issue? "Hah! . . . I had to drag even this information out of him," the Menendez staffer e- mailed back. When the senator and assistant secretary finally met, Menendez pressed him to take Melgen's side in a contract dispute between the Dominican government and a port security firm that the eye doctor owned.

Over the next few months, the indictment alleges, Menendez also met with the head of Medicare and then the secretary of Health and Human Services, seeking a policy change that would spare Melgen from repaying $9 million that his eye practice had been accused of overbilling. Yet without an explicit deal that no sane person would put in writing -- "I'll meet with HHS bigwigs if you give $600,000 to a super PAC" -- the exchange of otherwise legal contributions for official acts may not qualify as bribery. Menendez has pleaded not guilty. And ironically, evidence that Melgen had been plying Menendez with free travel for years undercuts the idea that donations in 2012 bought the senator's favor. "This was a real friendship," the senator's lawyer said last week, "and not a corrupt relationship."

It can't be both? In her book "Corruption in America,"legal scholar Zephyr Teachout argues that, for most of the nation's history, "corruption" included not just outright bribery but "many situations where politicians and public institutions serve private interests at the public expense." In last year's conviction of former Massachusetts probation chief John O'Brien, who phonied up hiring records so he could steer jobs to legislators' political cronies, jurors saw the outrageousness of a situation that seemed normal to jaded pros.

Rather than leave it to prosecutors to fight corruption one indictment at a time, Teachout prefers a regimen of political hygiene -- routine ethics and campaign-finance restrictions for all. The Supreme Court now views many such rules as limiting free expression in a dynamic media environment. But if the Menendez documents are any guide, recent decisions have merely opened up a wild new frontier for the oldest idea in politics: You scratch my back, and I'll scratch yours.

Dante Ramos can be reached at dante.ramos@globe.com. Follow him on Twitter @danteramos.
