 Former security tsar charged with graft 

Zhou Yongkang could face a death sentence if he is found guilty of taking bribes, abuse of power and intentionally leaking state secrets

Former security chief Zhou Yongkang has been formally charged with taking bribes, abuse of power and intentionally leaking state secrets.

The announcement triggered speculation over when the trial would be held, how open it would be and whether Zhou, the first Politburo Standing Committee member to stand trial on criminal charges, would face the death penalty.

Zhou is to stand trial in Tianjin , about 120km from Beijing.

The corruption charges relate to a span between 1988 and 2012 that covers most of Zhou’s three-decade political career, which began in 1983.

According to the Supreme People’s Procuratorate, Zhou was accused of taking large bribes during his various roles. These were his time as vice-general manager of China National Petroleum Corporation; provincial Communist Party chief in Sichuan ; head of the Ministry of Public Security; and chief of the Central Politics and Law Commission. “[Zhou’s] abuse of power has led to a great loss of public funds and has done severe damage to the national and public interest,” the procuratorate said.

The maximum penalty for taking bribes is death. No details were given of the charge that he had intentionally leaked state secrets. The charge, which is distinct from that of leaking state secrets to foreign organisations or individuals, carries a maximum penalty of seven years’ jail.

Zhang Qianfan , a legal scholar at Peking University, believed Zhou would not be executed. “The court is more likely to give him a reprieved [suspended] death sentence or life imprisonment … Still we will have to wait until the trial to see how much money is involved and whether it constitutes a crime subject to a death sentence,” Zhang said.

The authorities announced in July last year that Zhou was being investigated for alleged abuse of power and corruption.

The South China Morning Post reported in August 2013 that a case had been opened against him. Analysts said this broke a decades-old convention that senior party leaders could not be prosecuted.

The party said in December that Zhou would face criminal charges after he was expelled from the party.

At that time Xinhua said the allegations included “exchanging power and money for sex”.

The Supreme People’s Court said last month that Zhou had “undermined the party’s solidarity and engaged in political activities not approved by the authorities”, a rare accusation that some analysts suggested was an indication that Zhou would face charges for political offences.

Dozens of officials with connections to Zhou have been detained on suspicion of graft in recent months. Many are linked to Zhou’s former power bases in the oil industry and in Sichuan.

Zhou Qiang , the president of the Supreme People’s Court, said last month that Zhou was one of 28 officials accused of graft who would face “open trials in accordance with the law”.

It is not clear if the trial will genuinely be open to the press and public as some of the charges relate to national security.

Additional reporting by Laura Zhou and Andrea Chen

More reports A4
