Senior Hispanic senator in court on corruption charges

World

Senator Bob Menendez has agreed to step aside from his position as the top Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in the wake of corruption and bribery charges filed against him by federal prosecutors, while vowing to fight the allegations and remain in the Senate.

A Cuban-American, Senator Menendez is one of the most prominent Hispanic political figures in the US. He denounced the charges, saying he was "not going anywhere". He appeared in federal court last night in Newark, New Jersey, to hear the charges.

"I'm outraged that prosecutors at the Justice Department were tricked into starting this investigation three years ago with false allegations by those who have a political motive to silence me," he said at a press conference. "I'm angry and ready to fight because today contradicts my public service and my entire life."

Mr Menendez, 61, has been under a cloud since 2013, when news leaked of a raid by federal authorities on the offices of Salomon Melgen, a prominent Florida doctor who has been a donor to his campaigns. According to the charges, Mr Melgen showered him with gifts, including hotel nights in Paris and flights on his private jet as well as thousands of dollars for his legal defence fund.

In return, prosecutors allege, Mr Menendez, who has been at the forefront of the debate on Capitol Hill on US sanctions on Iran, helped organise visas for Dominican girlfriends of Dr Melgen and intervened in medical billing disputes with the federal government worth millions of dollars. Senator Menendez is facing 14 counts, including bribery, conspiracy and false statements. Also charged is Dr Melgen, who declined requests to cooperate with the investigation of the senator. It's also alleged that the senator helped his friend hold on to a lucrative contract to provide cargo screening services to the Dominican Republic.

The case could bring unwelcome attention to Democrats in Washington. But one senior colleague, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York said: "Bob Menendez is one of the best legislators in the Senate and is always fighting hard for the people of his state."

The affair is also reaching into the offices of another Democrat senator who has benefited from the doctor's largesse. Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota she said she would return all contributions she had banked from him and also from Senator Menendez. She is not charged in the case.
