Around the world

North America A website owner who encouraged users to post sexually explicit images of other people without their permission has been sentenced to 18 years in prison. Kevin Bollaert, 28, allowed more than 10,000 photos, mostly of women, to be posted to his now-defunct revenge porn website, UGotPosted.com. He had users include identifying information with the photos, such as names, addresses and links to Facebook profiles. He then emailed the victims, telling them their photos could be removed for up to US$350 ($460) through his second site, ChangeMyReputation.com. At his trial in February in California Superior Court in San Diego, 21 victims testified to the damage Bollaert’s site had caused. He was charged with 21 counts of identity theft and six counts of extortion. Bollaert’s site was shut down in December 2013.

Latin America Mexico’s state-run oil company continues to search for three missing workers from a platform fireball that killed four others, while beginning to restore production at the damaged Gulf of Mexico facility, officials said yesterday. Petroleos Mexicanos, or Pemex, expected to start processing 170,000 barrels of crude by yesterday and restore 80 per cent of production in the coming week, said Gustavo Hernandez, director of exploration and production. The Abkatun platform was handling 220,000 barrels of crude when a fire hit last week, causing the evacuation of 301 workers, some of whom leapt into the sea to escape the flames.

Asia/Oceania A man was yesterday under police guard in hospital after an overnight siege in a central Melbourne restaurant. The disgruntled former employee of Ludlow Bar and Dining held a woman hostage in the Southbank restaurant for almost eight hours while armed with a knife. Negotiators convinced him to let her go at 5.30am yesterday local time and the man was then Tasered and arrested. The 35-year-old man was wheeled out on a stretcher and taken to St Vincent’s Hospital.

?The Queensland Government has shot down reports it’s being urged to call a snap election. Health Minister Cameron Dick said the idea had not been discussed by the Cabinet.

Europe Some 1500 migrants trying to cross the Mediterranean to Italy in five boats were rescued in one day, Italian coastguards say. Four coastguard vessels and an Italian navy ship intervened to save three large boats carrying migrants off the Libyan coast after intercepting distress calls, only to find two other boats in difficulty nearby. The Italian vessels were yesterday transferring the migrants to the island of Lampedusa and the Sicilian ports of Augusta and Porto Empedocle. In a separate incident on Saturday, 318 migrants were brought to the Sicilian port of Pozzallo after being rescued off Libya by an Icelandic navy ship patrolling for the European Union borders agency Frontex. The migrants included 14 children and five pregnant women, authorities said. The number of migrants entering the EU illegally in 2014 almost tripled to 276,000, according to Frontex, nearly 220,000 arriving via the Mediterranean.

Middle East Hundreds of residents of a Palestinian refugee camp in the Syrian capital Damascus fled amid shelling by government forces and clashes between Isis (Islamic State) fighters and Palestinian militants, activists said. The camp has been subjected to intense shelling and airstrikes by the Government.

Africa A bomb blast on a bridge leading to an upscale neighbourhood in central Cairo killed a policeman and wounded at least two passersby, hours after Egyptian security forces killed the leader of an extremist group that claimed responsibility, police said. Extremist group Ajnad Misr, or Soldiers of Egypt, claimed responsibility for the bombing in a message posted on a Twitter account it uses. A security official said troops had killed Ajnad Misr’s leader and founder, Hammam Mohamed Attia, 33, in a shootout at a Cairo apartment at dawn.
