Orix acts on ‘Coke kickbacks’

Multi-billion-dollar global conglomerate Orix Corporation is considering launching an investigation into subsidiaries across a string of countries after the company’s Australian chief executive was arrested over allegations of bribery and money laundering linked to Coca-Cola Amatil.

Orix Australia chief executive John Carter was arrested on Thursday after police arrived at his $4 million Vaucluse home in Sydney’s east over $504,900 of allegedly corrupt payments alleged to have been made to a senior employee of the beverage giant.

Orix Australia operates a $1.2 billion vehicle fleet supply network and one of its key clients is Coca-Cola Amatil, which contracts Orix to deliver its products.

Orix Corporation Japan-based spokesman Chun Yang yesterday told The Weekend Australian the group had set up an internal taskforce which had “just taken place”.

“We are currently conducting an investigation into the matter and we have set up an internal task force which has just taken place,” Mr Yang said.

When asked whether that investigation would extend beyond the group’s Australian operations Mr Yang replied: “That’s something we are thinking about.” NSW Police have suggested the alleged corruption between Orix and Coca-Cola Amatil extends much further than has been disclosed to date and that investigations into payments “totalling millions of dollars and dating back several years” are continuing.

NSW Police Fraud and Cybercrime Squad detective superintendent Arthur Katsogiannis has announced a crackdown on corporate crime.

In the past two weeks, two former senior executives of the ­nation’s biggest bank, the CBA, have been arrested and charged with allegedly receiving bribes ­totalling $US2.1m from US IT supplier ServiceMesh.

When he announced the CBA sting on March 18, Mr Katsogiannis said the fraud squad was working on several other corruption cases involving corporations and NSW Police were working with authorities from a number of international jurisdictions.

“White-collar crime — and in particular employee-related fraud — costs the NSW economy millions of dollars,” Mr Katsogiannis said after the arrest of Mr Carter.

On March 25 police arrested a 61-year-old senior Coca-Cola Amatil executive — who was responsible for the beverage company’s $30m annual distribution fleet contract — for allegedly receiving the $504,900 via “four large deposits” made into a bank account between June 2014 and February 2015.

Last week, NSW Police arrested a 58-year-old employee of Orix Australia who it alleges made the payments with the knowledge of Mr Carter.

“Police will allege (Mr Carter) was aware of the corrupt commissions and had provided advice in relation to how they were paid,” NSW Police said yesterday.

NSW Police launched an investigation into the alleged fraud — named Strike Force Englefield — late last year after Coca-Cola Amatil contacted police to report “suspicious activity” in relation to the management of its vehicle fleet.

A Coca-Cola Amatil spokeswoman said the company was providing its “complete co­operation and support to the police” but would not comment further while police investigations were continuing.

Mr Carter is one of two Australia-based directors of Orix Australia, which is a fully owned subsidiary of the Japan-based Orix Corporation, which is listed on the Japan Stock Exchange and New York Stock Exchange.Orix Corporation has about 30,000 employees working across 36 countries.
