Menendez case stirs questions Indictment alleges donations made to sway N.J. senator

The federal bribery case against Democratic Sen. Bob Menendez of New Jersey marks the first time large-scale super PAC donations have figured prominently as evidence of a political corruption scheme, renewing questions about how truly independently such groups operate.

The 22-count indictment against Menendez and wealthy Florida ophthalmologist Salomon Melgen hinges in part on $600,000 that Melgen gave to the Senate Majority PAC, a Democratic super political action committee earmarked to support the senator's 2012 re-election.

Menendez pleaded not guilty in federal court Thursday to charges including bribery, conspiracy and making false statements. Melgen also pleaded not guilty.

Senate Majority PAC officials have not been accused of any wrongdoing. But the Justice Department argued in the court filing that the donations were among the things of value Melgen offered Menendez so the senator would use his position to help get the donor's girlfriends visas to enter the country and to influence government officials to help Melgen's businesses.

The case illustrates how super PACs, which can accept unlimited donations and are supposed to be walled off from the candidates they support, can be viewed by donors as vehicles to ingratiate themselves with politicians.

"You just see that everything that goes on behind the scenes confirms people's worst fears: that someone can swear that there's no quid pro quo and no deals, but it's very hard to know if that's true, and it depends on your confidence in politicians to tell the truth," said Richard Hasen, a law professor at the University of California at Irvine who studies campaign finance regulation.

Critics of unfettered political spending said the Menendez case shows it is easier for the very rich to unduly influence elected officials through groups that accept unlimited amounts of money.

"With so much money at stake, it's not surprising to find senators and representatives paying special attention to the desires of their donors," Miles Rapoport, president of Common Cause citizens lobby, said.

But advocates of loosening campaign finance restrictions said that just because Melgen may have thought he could influence Menendez through super PAC donations does not mean the senator was compromised, even if he knew about the donations.

"Gratitude is not corruption," said conservative election law attorney James Bopp. "Was there an exchange that is related to the super PAC? And if there was, then it would be corrupting. ... But there is nothing inherently corrupting in somebody who wants favors or likes somebody giving money to a super PAC."

The Supreme Court has held since the 1976 Buckley v. Valeo case that independent political spending does not corrupt elected officials. That was the argument that underpinned the landmark 2010 Citizens United case, in which the justices said that corporations and unions could spend unlimited sums of money on political activity.

One of the key issues in the case will be whether Menendez played a role in directing Melgen to make the super PAC contributions. Under campaign finance rules, a federal officeholder may only solicit donations of up to $5,000 for a super PAC.

Melgen donated $600,000 to Senate Majority PAC from the corporate treasury of his company, Vitreo-Retinal Consultants, in 2012. That year, the super PAC spent $582,000 on behalf of Mendendez's re-election, according to data from the Center for Responsive Politics.

Four bribery counts in the indictment are based on the donations to the group, alleging that the senator "sought and received" $600,000 from Melgen for Senate Majority PAC in exchange for Menendez's efforts to help Melgen resolve a Medicare billing dispute.

Stephanie Potter, executive director of Senate Majority PAC, said Melgen was "one of hundreds of donors supporting Senate Majority PAC's mission of electing Democrats to the US Senate."
