Menendez's Bad Move: Standing Up to the Prez

The suspicious timing of the federal corruption charges brought against Sen. Bob Menendez.

How galling to see New Jersey Sen. Robert Menendez decrying federal corruption charges during his press conference ("Sidelining Menendez," Editorial, April 3).

It has been proven time and time again that the only truly congressional bipartisan issue is corruption. When will it finally be time for term limits and the public financing of campaigns?

Clifford D. Glass

Rego Park

The Post thinks it's "telling" that the Justice Department indicted Menendez but refused to indict Lois Lerner? And it thinks it's telling that Obama, in violation of the law, told the Justice Department to go after Menendez in retaliation for his positions?

In the Lerner case, the Republican Congress again attempted to set itself up as a court, which it is not. This is not the first time that its claim that a Fifth Amendment right to remain silent has been waived has been shot down. No court would support it. The job of Congress is to hear testimony bearing on legislation, not to conduct trials.

If Menendez were not a super pro-Israel, super anti-Cuba, super hawk on Iran, The Post would have his head on a pike. At the very least, it would have features on the babes he helped get visas.

John L. Moncrief

Fanwood, NJ

The only transparency in the Obama administration is the unambiguous warning to anyone, Democrat or Republican, not to interfere with the vainglorious establishment of the Obama legacy.

If one is an outspoken conservative, beware the hounds of the IRS. If one is a liberal in vociferous disagreement with Cuba and Iran policies, beware Attorney General Eric Holder unleashing his minions.

What the president professes is not respect or esteem for the Constitution, but a cynical circumvention of its cherished principles. James Monroe

Long Beach

If you publicly criticize Obama's ego-driven overtures to Iran, as Menendez did, the Justice Department. will come down on you like a ton of bricks. Target conservatives and destroy all relevant records, as Lerner did, and the department gives you a pass.

That's not a whiff of corruption emanating from Holder's crew - it's an overpowering stench. Pete McArdle

Yorktown Heights 
