Former PM demands probe into murder

Former Malaysian strongman Mahathir Mohamad has called for the reopening of investigations into who ordered the murder of a Mongolian socialite at the centre of high-level corruption allegations in Kuala Lumpur, provoking a furore in the ruling party he led for 22 years.

In a vitriolic attack on Malaysia's current Prime Minister Najib Razak, Dr Mahathir referred to a hidden hand in the murder, backing a claim by Malaysian police commander Sirul Azhar Umar, who is being held in Sydney's Villawood detention centre, that he was ordered to kill the glamorous 28-year-old Altantuya Shaariibuu.

"People are asking who gave the orders," Dr Mahathir wrote in his blog.

"Apart from [Prime Minister] Najib dismissing the claims as rubbish, there was no investigation," he wrote.

"This involves human lives. It would be very cruel for Sirul to die for just carrying out orders."

Sirul, a former bodyguard of Mr Najib, fled to Australia last year before he was sentenced to hang by Malaysia's highest court in January for shooting Ms Shaariibuu in the head twice as she begged for the life of her unborn child, before blowing her up in jungle on Kuala Lumpur's outskirts.

Allegations have simmered for eight years that Ms Shaariibuu was murdered to keep her quiet about purported kickbacks to high-level Malaysian officials over a $US2 billion ($2.6 billion) purchase of French submarines.

Described as a jet-setting party girl, Ms Shaariibuu was a translator in the later stages of the negotiations.

Mr Najib strongly denies ever meeting Ms Shaariibuu or having any link to her, and his government denies any wrongdoing in the submarine purchases, which are the subject of an investigation by magistrates in France.

The case has been taboo in Malaysia's government-controlled mainstream media and authorities in Kuala Lumpur have refused to reopen the investigation despite the fact that no motive for the murder has ever been proven.

Although nearing 90, Dr Mahathir remains a powerful figure in UMNO and in 2009 spearheaded a campaign to elevate Mr Najib to the prime ministership.

But relations between the two men collapsed amid acrimony last year after UMNO, which has ruled Malaysia since 1956, lost the popular vote at the 2013 elections but stayed in power because of a gerrymandered voting system.

In his widely read blog, Dr Mahathir said Malaysians "no longer trust" Mr Najib and that if he remains in power UMNO will lose the next election.

"Once UMNO loses, it cannot be rehabilitated," he said.
