AFL 'target of international match-fixers'

One of Australia's most senior policemen has warned the AFL that it has lost its immunity to international gambling corruption and that the one-time low-profile domestic game has become an increasing focus of Asian betting markets.

Graham Ashton, a deputy commissioner with the Federal Police, has urged the 18 clubs to strengthen their integrity resources against the growing threat of overseas match-fixing syndicates.

Ashton, the former Victorian deputy police commissioner who recently returned to the Federal Police, said there was strong evidence to suggest international match-fixers were educating themselves about the structure and regulations governing Australian rules football. "They understand soccer and cricket and tennis," Ashton told Fairfax Media, "but in the past they've not really understood the AFL. That's changing and the better they understand how the AFL games work the more open it is to corruption."

The deputy commissioner last month addressed senior executives, board members and integrity staffers from the 18 clubs at AFL headquarters and urged those who had not already done so to establish integrity committees.

In the days that followed the integrity briefing the AFL's officers investigated footballers Lachie Hunter and Jack Crisp for allegedly placing bets on football along with a part-time goal review staffer. Hunter was cleared after it was found a VFL player had used his betting account and former Lion-turned-Magpie Crisp received a small fine.

Sourcing figures from the Hong Kong Jockey Club, Ashton said that their statistics showed a slow but steady increase in betting on the AFL. The largest legal operation in the region, the HKJC handles just 5 per cent of the gambling market but mirrored wider activity and kept a close watch on changing betting habits.

"It's slowly increasing but the numbers are growing all the time," he said. "The focus for the clubs is to form integrity committees and, if they can afford it, a full-time integrity officer not just as an operational exercise but they need to really understand the profiles of the people players are hanging around with."

The recent integrity conference at the AFL demonstrated a number of different models among clubs with Ashton praising the West Coast and Hawthorn models while acknowledging those clubs had the funds to afford to bolster their defence against corruption. The Eagles were the first to appoint an integrity office after that club's illicit drugs scandals and the knowledge senior players were developing strong underworld ties.

Ashton said West Coast's Peter Staples "has immersed himself in the culture of the playing group. He travels with them and he's always aware of who they are hanging around with."

Former AFL boss Andrew Demetriou urged all clubs to appoint integrity officers in 2013 after the Essendon scandal broke and early last year criticised former Tiger Jake King for his public friendship with Toby Mitchell, whom King two seasons ago brought into the Richmond rooms after a game.

The deputy commissioner, who oversaw the establishment of the Sports Integrity Intelligence Unit, said clubs needed to better understand the ways in which shady characters infiltrated the clubs. "It tends to happen through former players, fathers of players," he said. "I haven't had a chance to have a good look at the second tier of the game but it's in that sub-elite level where there is a growing threat, as we found in Victoria with the Southern Stars (soccer club)."
