China's spy chief charged with corruption

The former overlord of China's domestic security apparatus, a man known as the King of Hell, has been indicted on charges of corruption, abuse of power and the disclosure of state secrets.

The announcement places Zhou Yongkang, 72, at the centre of China's biggest corruption scandal since the Communist party took control in 1949.

Mr Zhou's indictment is seen by many analysts as the most visible symptom of torment within the party. It breaches an unspoken pact in the highest echelons that China's most senior leaders would not be prosecuted after their retirement, however heinous their crimes.

In the case of Mr Zhou, the old rules appear to be crumbling fast. A terse statement on the website of the Supreme People's Procuratorate yesterday described the social impact of Mr Zhou's crimes as "vile". An article in the People's Daily, a mouthpiece of the party, cast him as a traitor.

Mr Zhou, who has not been seen in public since late 2013, is accused of exploiting his position to seek benefits for others, illegally accepting huge assets from other parties, abuse of power and causing heavy losses to public property, the state and the people. Suspicions of corruption are also believed to focus on his time as a top executive at China's biggest stateowned oil company.

The indictment, and the politically explosive trial expected this year, have been read as a resounding signal of strength fromPresident Xi the increasingly dictatorial leader and the mastermind of modern China's most sustained anticorruption campaign.

Many have accused Mr Xi of using the campaign to bring down potential rivals. They do not come much bigger or more powerful than Mr Zhou. Formerly in charge of China's vast police and paramilitary apparatus, he was also a close ally of Bo Xilai, the political high-flyer, now in jail, whose wife was convicted of murdering a British businessman. In the months before Bo's political demise, he had become a charismatic challenger to Mr Xi.

The decision to prosecute Mr Zhou, analysts argue, is not without risk to Mr Xi. Tensions in the party's top ranks have traditionally been held at bay by the rules of mutually assured destruction. Everyone has something on everyone else — and Mr Zhou has more than the others because of his control of the police.

Mr Zhou, who until 2012 served in the nine-member politburo standing committee that controls China, wielded his power with a notoriously brutal and abusive swagger. Some of China's most internationally reviled actions, including the imprisonment of the Nobel peace prize winner Liu Xiaobo and the detention of the artist Ai Weiwei, happened on Mr Zhou's watch. His alleged crimes took place over many years and include periods when he was the deputy general manager of China's largest oil company and the party chief of Sichuan.

No date has been set for the trial, which is expected to take place in the northeastern port city of Tianjin. Important political trials have tended to take place away from Beijing, as a means of reducing the potential for unrest and demonstrations by supporters. Tianjin would have been chosen, according to lawyers, because it sits outside Mr Zhou's sphere of influence.
