Disgraced Chinese security czar charged

Zhou faces trial for bribery, abuse of power and leaking state secrets

FORMER domestic security czar Zhou Yongkang has been charged with bribery, abuse of power and disclosing state secrets as China inches closer to a highly anticipated trial of one of the country's most senior officials in decades.

Zhou, a former member of the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC), the country's apex decision-making body, is one of the most prominent "tigers" or high- ranking officials to be ensnared in President Xi Jinping's ferocious anti-corruption drive.

His trial will be held in the northern port city of Tianjin, prosecutors said yesterday.

An indictment posted online also accused Zhou, 72, of taking advantage of his posts to seek gains for others and illegally taking property and assets from others. He also abused his power, causing huge losses to public property and the interests of the state and the people, it added.

"The social impact is vile and the circumstances were extra- ordinarily severe," the document said, adding that he also "intentionally leaked state secrets".

Zhou's alleged crimes took place over more than two decades, including the periods when he was deputy general manager of China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC), party boss in south-western Sichuan province, public security minister and a member of the PSC, the statement said.

The probe was an unprecedented move that showed Mr Xi's anti-graft drive had reached levels of the nation's leadership previously thought untouchable.

While the announcement did not specify a trial date, experts say the hearing is "imminent", possibly taking place within the next month or so. Experts also say Tianjin could have been picked to ensure impartiality as it has no obvious connection to Zhou.

"It is likely that a defendant's network of associates would be a factor in determining a trial's location," said anti-corruption expert Xiao Bin of the Zhongshan University in Guangzhou.

"But Tianjin's proximity to the capital Beijing could also be another factor as the trial might involve some people in the government."

Chinese officials have promised that the proceedings will be open in accordance with the law, but access to previous high-profile cases such as fallen political star Bo Xilai's trial have been tightly controlled.

How Beijing might handle this potentially most politically explosive trial and manage media coverage in the light of the charges that Zhou had leaked state secrets will be closely watched.

Hong Kong-based political analyst Willy Lam said the "chatter" in Beijing indicates that Zhou might face the death sentence. But if he had fully cooperated with the authorities to save the life of his son Zhou Bin, a suspended death sentence might be meted out instead. The younger Zhou was arrested on corruption charges in December 2013.

"As to the nature of the state secrets, it could be secretly taping the telephone conversations of Mr Xi or former president Hu Jintao, or leaking information about the business activities of the relatives of current or former PSC members to the media," he added.

Zhou and Bo were alleged to have plotted a coup against Mr Xi, leading to their being targeted politically, some experts say.

Bo's career fell apart after the death of a British businessman, for which Bo's wife, Gu Kailai, was convicted of murder.

Already, the dragnet around Zhou has led to more than 300 of his relatives and former subordinates being investigated.

His trial headlines a string of other high-profile hearings expected this year involving many of his former associates. Li Chuncheng, a former deputy party boss of Sichuan, and Jiang Jiemin, a former CNPC chairman, will face trial in Hubei province.

esthert@sph.com.sg
