Reform will make officials efficient

China's unprecedented campaign against corruption is aimed at facilitating administrative reforms, which, in turn, will help implement the basic principle of the Constitution that "all power belongs to the people". The anti-corruption campaign, however, is also said to have lowered the efficiency levels of some government officials.

Some say this is the price society has to pay for China's transition from an economy based on administrative norms and approval procedures to a market-based economy. The measures to simplify the administrative procedures or to transfer them from government departments to the market, they say, have caused many benefits previously enjoyed by government officials to disappear. And the resultant grievance among government officials has made them less efficient.

Such analyses, which link the anti-corruption drive to officials' inefficiency, are absurd.

Government officials draw their powers from the Constitution and laws. In other words, officials are authorized by the people to exercise their powers according to the law on their behalf. So if some public servants shirk their duties and responsibilities just because they have "lost" some of the extra benefits because of the anti-corruption drive, higher authorities or the judiciary should punish them.

According to civil servant and related laws, government officials should act in line with the law, and they are liable to administrative or judicial punishment for compromising the rights or interests of individuals or organizations. As such, dereliction of duty or misconduct by public servants is not only a working style issue, but a legal issue as well if it causes harm to individuals or organizations.

That some public servants are not working as efficiently as they should can be partly attributed to the wrong functional positioning of some departments because of the central government's accelerated efforts to delegate part of its powers to lower-level governments and allow the market to play a more decisive role in the distribution of resources. Since some departments lack legal bases for their functions, they are sometimes unwilling to carry out their work, especially if their functions overlap with other departments. To resolve this problem, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, the top legislature, should enact a unified rule.

Because of lack of scientific or detailed redistribution of functions, the merger of different departments as part of the administrative reforms has increased the possibility of not one but multiple departments being answerable for one job. This problem can be solved only through expeditious administrative reforms, which will make the newly established departments strictly fulfill their responsibilities.

The NPC should also enact a specific law on administrative departments' reform that offers clear legal bases for the establishment of new government organs and their detailed functions.

The shared responsibilities of different administrative departments for verification or approval of a project is also a cause of some officials' low efficiency. For example, it is common for a business organization seeking approval of the development and reform authorities for a new project to be told to first get the approval of the financial or environmental protection department, and then to be directed by the latter to get the advance approval of the former. Such a complicated approval procedure should be simplified or done away with to raise functional efficiency.

The crackdown on corruption, therefore, is not the cause of some government officials' low efficiency. The fight against corruption eradicates the space for "power-money" trading and plugs the hole for "grey" or illegal incomes. The lower efficiency is the issue of their bad working style that the authorities should completely eradicate along with bureaucracy. In the long run, the ongoing anti-corruption campaign and administrative reforms will compel government officials to improve their working style and raise their efficiency level.

The author is dean of the Anti-Corruption Research School of Zhongnan University of Economics and Law.
