The Giant of Africa Votes

When Muhammadu Buhari last became head of state in Nigeria, it was via a military coup in 1983, when he launched a nasty campaign against “indiscipline” and corruption in his vast African nation that earned him a reputation for brutality and disdain for human rights. Hundreds of politicians and businessmen were convicted by military courts, and minor offenses — like cheating on exams — were enough to send Nigerians to jail. Mr. Buhari was himself overthrown 20 months later, yet now, at age 72, he has returned to rule Nigeria — and, he vows, to continue the war on corruption. The difference is that he has returned through a democratic election.

It’s a huge difference. The general election in Nigeria on March 28 was the most competitive ever held in Africa’s most populous country, and if the defeated president, Goodluck Jonathan, peacefully hands power to Mr. Buhari on May 29, it will be the first handover between civilians of different political parties since independence. Given Mr. Jonathan’s gracious concession after his crushing defeat, there is no reason to doubt that this will happen, and every reason to hope that other African states follow the example of the “giant of Africa.”

Mr. Buhari’s victory was in part due to selective public memory of his earlier rule. To a majority of Nigerian voters, the trim and austere former general increasingly appeared to be the one leader who could stanch the massive loss of wealth to what the World Bank called a “deeply embedded culture of corruption,” and who could rebuild the army into a force capable of taking on the militant Islamist group Boko Haram, which has spread terror and death for almost six years now through northeastern Nigeria. The outgoing government had claimed some success against Boko Haram, but that was achieved only by hiring South African mercenaries.

Mr. Buhari’s task will not be easy. The price of oil, the resource from which the government draws the bulk of its funding, has fallen sharply, taking Nigeria’s currency and foreign currency reserves with it, and history shows that a culture of corruption is not easily uprooted.

But the president-elect has made clear that he is aware of the challenges before him. More important, the Nigerian electorate, which gave him and his All Progressives Congress party 55 percent of its vote across geographic, religious and tribal lines, has made clear that it is thoroughly sick of corruption and Boko Haram. Mr. Buhari promises, this time, to abide by the law. Should he be tempted to slide back into his old authoritarian ways, there is another election just four years down the road.
