World News: China Charges Powerful Ex-Official With Bribery, Abuse

BEIJING -- Prosecutors charged China's powerful former security chief with bribery, abuse of power and leaking state secrets, formalizing Communist Party accusations against the most senior figure yet to be targeted in Beijing's sweeping corruption crackdown.

The official Xinhua News Agency said on Friday that prosecutors alleged Zhou Yongkang took advantage of his position to seek benefits for others and illegally accepted other people's "very valuable" property. They alleged that he also intentionally disclosed state secrets, Xinhua said, without elaborating.

The alleged misdeeds took place while Mr. Zhou was a member of the Communist Party's Politburo Standing Committee, its most powerful decision-making body, according to Xinhua. But Xinhua said he committed his alleged crimes throughout much of his career, including his stint as a top executive at state-run oil giant China National Petroleum Corp. as well as his time as a senior party official in China's southwestern Sichuan province.

"The state and its people suffered heavy losses and a negative social impact," Xinhua said.

Mr. Zhou has been unavailable for comment. He was ousted from the party in December amid a probe into potential violations of party discipline, which in China is usually a euphemism for corruption.

A Wall Street Journal investigation last year found that Mr. Zhou's family members and friends forged business ties with China National Petroleum and amassed holdings in the petroleum, investment and media sectors worth tens of millions of dollars.

No Chinese political figure as senior as Mr. Zhou has faced criminal charges since the group known as the Gang of Four was tried in the early 1980s for its role in the Cultural Revolution, the radical political movement of the 1960s and '70s.

Mr. Zhou retired as one of then-nine members of the Standing Committee in 2012, when the Communist Party elevated Xi Jinping as its top official and installed a new slate of leaders. Mr. Zhou was once seen as untouchable because his responsibilities included overseeing China's police, courts and intelligence agencies.

But Mr. Zhou's standing was seen as weakened in 2012, when Chinese prosecutors accused another senior politician and political ally, Bo Xilai, of bribery, embezzlement and abuse of power. Mr. Bo was convicted two years ago, and soon after, other figures associated with Mr. Zhou came under scrutiny.

In 2013 party investigators placed senior oil-industry officials -- including Jiang Jiemin, a former high-ranking China National Petroleum executive who was then running a commission overseeing state-run companies -- under investigation for alleged violations of party discipline. All had ties to Mr. Zhou during his previous oil-industry career.

Mr. Xi is overseeing a campaign that has detained hundreds of officials since he took power and vowed to target both "tigers and flies," meaning senior leaders as well as junior bureaucrats. Some political insiders and analysts say Mr. Xi is using China's anticorruption campaign to purge the party's upper ranks of potential rivals.

Mr. Zhou faces tough prospects in court. Investigators have been probing officials in his circle for two years. Generally prosecutors don't move forward with charges against top officials until they have built a substantial case. The party also controls the judicial system, and prosecutors enjoy a strong success rate.

Prosecutors brought the charges in a court in the northeastern Chinese city of Tianjin, Xinhua said. The news agency said Mr. Zhou has access to legal counsel.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service
