Tribune series receive honors Investigations on red light cameras, youth treatment centers lauded

The Chicago Tribune's investigation of corruption and undeserved ticketing in Chicago's red light camera system has been honored with the 2014 Taylor Family Award for Fairness in Journalism, according to the Nieman Foundation at Harvard University.

Awarding the prize to reporters David Kidwell and Alex Richards, the Taylor judges praised their "dogged, ingenious investigation" and said they "brought a big dose of fairness to an incredibly unfair situation."

In reporting that began in 2012, the Tribune revealed a $2 million city bribery scheme that has led to federal indictments and more recently exposed a lack of oversight in the program that led to unexplained ticket spikes nabbing tens of thousands of Chicago drivers.

The Tribune also commissioned a study showing that while the city boasted about red light cameras increasing safety, the cameras did nothing to make drivers safer and may have caused an increase in injury-related crashes.

An investigation by Chicago magazine questioning how the Chicago Police Department keeps crime statistics was cited as one of two other finalists for the award. Chicago magazine, like the Chicago Tribune, is owned by Tribune Publishing. The other finalist was a Boston Globe series on a mentally ill patient.

Nieman announced the honors Tuesday. Richards is no longer with the Tribune; he is a trainer for the Investigative Reporters and Editors organization.

Another Tribune investigation last year, the "Harsh Treatment" series exposing problems in residential treatment centers for Illinois youths, recently won two awards for ethics, from the University of Oregon as well as the University of Wisconsin.

The series by reporters David Jackson, Gary Marx and Duaa Eldeib and photographer Anthony Souffle exposed how young Illinois state wards were assaulted and raped while state authorities failed to act on reports of abuse.

Three winners were chosen for the University of Oregon School of Journalism and Communication's Ancil Payne Award: the Tribune, the Arizona Republic and a high school newspaper, The Playwickian, in Langhorne, Pa.

Payne judge Joann Byrd, a former Washington Post ombudsman, praised the Tribune for its ethical decision-making in the "Harsh Treatment" series.

The Anthony Shadid Award at the University of Wisconsin Center for Journalism Ethics went to the Tribune, with three others as finalists: The Pittsburgh Tribune Review, Pro Publica and the Tulsa World.
