Exchange Rates Boost Alcoa

Alcoa Inc. swung to a first-quarter profit thanks to a turnaround in its smelting division, which was helped by exchange rates.

The New York-based company, the world's biggest aluminum company by volume, on Wednesday reported a profit of $195 million, or 14 cents a share, compared with a year-earlier loss of $178 million, or 16 cents a share. Revenue increased 6.7% over a year earlier to $5.82 billion.

Alcoa, the first major U.S. company to report first quarter earnings, has been touting its investments in making aluminum sheet for the car industry, and parts for airplanes. And while those units remained profitable, Alcoa got a lift in the quarter from its smelting division, which reported earnings of $187 million, compared with a $15 million loss a year ago.

The company credited “favorable foreign currency exchange rates, lower energy costs in Spain and productivity improvements" as factors improving the smelting business. Alcoa typically sells aluminum in dollars, but makes much of its metal outside the U.S., allowing it to benefit from lower costs as foreign currencies depreciate.

Chief Executive Klaus Kleinfeld said “swift action" had allowed its raw aluminum business to become “more competitive."

Alcoa has been cutting costs by closing smelters in the U.S., Australia and Europe, where it has relatively high energy costs. In March, it said it would look at cutting or selling as much as 500,000 tons of annual smelting capacity, or 14% of its total.

Since 2007, the company says it has closed or sold 1.3 million tons, or 31%, of its “highest-cost global smelting capacity." It managed to “curtail high cost capacity during the course of 2014," says Andrew Lane of resarcher Morningstar Inc.

The company said Wednesday its average third-party price has increased 10% to $2,420 per ton. Alcoa increased its assessment of total 2014 demand growth to 9%, from 7%, up to 54 million tons. That demand is helping to suck up the increase in exports coming out of China.

The global rolled products division, which makes sheet for the auto and beverage can industries, reported earnings of $34 million, down 42% compared with a year ago. The company cited oversupply in packaging, “increased research and development costs" for its development of a new method for rolling aluminum it has branded “Micromill" and ramp-up costs for a rolling mill in Saudi Arabia.

Alcoa said in March that it would buy Pittsburgh-based RTI International Metals Inc., one of the world's biggest makers of fabricated titanium products for the aerospace industry.

The RTI deal follows Alcoa's acquisition last year of U.K. jet-engine parts maker Firth Rixson Ltd. and its deal for Germany's Tital, which makes titanium and aluminum castings for jet and airplane engines, and aircraft frames.
