Output, profitability set for a boost

Analysts begin revising earnings estimates and target prices upwards; higher e-auction sales to spur margins, profits

News of the coal ministry removing the cap on Coal India’s e-auction sales enthused investors, leading to a 5.7 per cent jump in its stock, which closed at ~380 on Wednesday.

These sales fetch higher realisation and add to profitability. These were capped at seven per cent of overall volumes by the government, to meet input requirements of the power sector. Now, the government has allowed Coal India to revert to the earlier system of no cap on e-auction.

In the past, e-auction volumes have hovered at 10-12 per cent of the total. While a small part of overall volumes, e-action sales contribute 35-40 per cent of total Ebitda (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation). Hence, higher e-auction volumes would mean higher profitability, leading to earning upgrades.

Analysts at ICICI Securities say assuming e-auction volumes at 10 per cent of offtake for both FY16 and FY17, they expect Ebitda to increase 6.5 per cent and 4.4 per cent, respectively (compared to earlier estimates). They further add that 10 per cent was a general benchmark, with earlier instances when e-auction volumes had exceeded this much. As in FY14, when these were 58 million tonnes or 12.3 per cent of total sales of 472 mt.

Hence, they believe there exists an upside risk to earnings with respect to the e-auction volume in FY16 and FY17. Hence, they’ve raised their target price for the stock from ~415 to ~425. In this backdrop, one may also see some upgrades in the Bloomberg consensus target price that stood at ~392, from analysts polled in March.

The coal ministry’s decision also seems to have been influenced by the fact that Coal India is seeing inventory build-up. During FY15, while output was 494 mt, 97 per cent of the production target, offtake was 489 mt, about 94 per cent of the targeted 520 mt, partly due to evacuation issues. The demand for e-auction coal, however, has been increasing from players which had lost captive mines or do not have captive supplies. Analysts believe even if the newly allocated mines start contributing about 40 mt in the first year and continue growing their output, it would still take a few years to fill the gap between domestic demand and availability.

Currently, India imports 150 mt yearly. Rising power generation capacities and the need to feed existing underutilised plants mean the gap will remain. The government has set ambitious targets for Coal India, the country’s monopoly miner. The production target is 550 mt for FY16 and a billion tonnes for 2020.

Steps to counter infrastructure bottlenecks (for evacuation to users) are also on. Analysts at Nomura say the persisting impetus for greater engagement between central/state/local authorities to address factors constraining output bode well. They also expect a reasonable hike in fuel supply agreement coal prices over the next 12-18 months (ahead of wage revisions, due in FY17) and Ebitda margin, to be supported by a recent moderation of diesel prices.

Though some overhang of the government’s divestment of stake in the company might lead to temporary blips in the stock, analysts believe Coal India remains a good long-haul story.

Meanwhile, for the quarter ending March, analysts at Centrum Broking expect sales to increase 4.1 per cent year-on-year to ~5,386 crore, with Ebitda growing 5.5 per cent on the back of some improvement in e-auction volumes. Net profit is expected to rise 6.6 per cent to ~4,727 crore.
