Samsung earnings bolster turnround hopes; Technology hardware

Samsung Electronics' earnings beat analyst forecasts in the first quarter, bolstering the South Korean company's turnround hopes after a sharp fall in profits last year.

In preliminary guidance yesterday, the world's biggest technology company by revenue estimated operating profit of around Won5.9tn ($5.4bn) in the three months to March 31 - down 31 per cent from a year before but up from a quarterly trough of Won4.1tn in the third quarter of 2014. The company will publish detailed results later this month.

Analysts said the better earnings pointed to an improvement in Samsung's smartphone business - still the leader in global market share even after a fall last year . Polls by Bloomberg and Reuters had forecast operating profit of Won5.5tn and Won5.3tn respectively, and Samsung's guidance sent its shares up 0.8 per cent yesterday morning.

Samsung's market valuation has strengthened steadily since October, when the shares hit their lowest levels in two years as the company lost market share to Chinese smartphone producers such as Lenovo and Xiaomi .

Since then, Samsung stock has risen 36 per cent, adding more than $50bn to its market capitalisation as investors welcomed a 40 per cent dividend increase and a favourable reception for the new Galaxy S6 flagship phone.

Samsung executives had stoked anticipation for the first-quarter results with bullish public statements. "We're done with recovery," Kim Hyun-seok, head of Samsung's television business, told local reporters last week.

However, revenue was lower than expected, partly owing to weaker household electronics revenue in Europe and some emerging markets, whose currencies have fallen in recent months.

And while the earnings figure was up from Won5.3tn in the previous quarter, margins had shrunk after strong profits in the first half of last year - a level of profitability Samsung will not easily regain, said CW Chung, an analyst at Nomura, pointing to the ever-fiercer competition in the smartphone market.

"Last year's smartphone profit in the first half was about Won11tn; this year it will be [at most] Won6tn," he said.

In recent months Samsung has tried to recoup market share in emerging markets such as China with the launch of its mid-range Galaxy A smartphones. The company was criticised last year for offering phones in this market at higher prices and with lower technical specifications than Chinese rivals' products.

A far higher-profile launch was that of the Galaxy S6, which was unveiled on March 1 in Barcelona and will go on sale on Friday. Its two versions - one with a curved screen - were far better received than last year's Galaxy S5, which was deemed only an incremental improvement from earlier models.

Samsung's first-quarter results were boosted by early shipments of 3m Galaxy S6 phones, said Daniel Kim at Macquarie, citing guidance from the company. Last year Samsung had shipped 10m units of the Galaxy S5 within 25 days of its launch, although disappointing demand prompted a surge in marketing spending as the company struggled to offload unsold stock.

Analysts also pointed to an improvement at Samsung's logic chip business, which lost about $500m last year but has been boosted by Samsung's decision to use its own Exynos processor in the Galaxy S6 phone.

A further increase will come in the third quarter when the company begins to produce processors for the next version of Apple's iPhone, according to people with knowledge of the situation.
