Vivendi to increase dividend payments; Media

French group's deal with minority shareholder averts showdown at AGM

Vivendi has reached an agreement with a minority shareholder to increase dividend payments over the next two years, averting a showdown at this month's annual meeting.

The Paris-based content and media group said it had made peace with P. Schoenfeld Asset Management (PSAM), a US hedge fund, that had demanded additional payouts.

As part of the agreement, Vivendi will return an additional €2 per share to shareholders - to be split into two payments made at the end of this year and the beginning of 2016 - on top of the €1 per share over the next three years that it had already announced.

The additional cash will mean returning €6.75bn to shareholders, more than the €5.7bn it had initially signalled, which included a share buyback scheme - but considerably less than the €9bn payout PSAM had demanded.

Vivendi said the US fund had, in return, dropped its demands at the forthcoming AGM on April 17.

It also said that PSAM would vote against another minority shareholder who wants Vivendi to exempt itself from a new French law that would give longer-term shareholders, such as chairman Vincent Bolloré , twice as many votes as new investors.

PSAM said it was "pleased to take note of the formal commitments entered into by Vivendi at the end of these meetings that led to significant increases in the amount of dividend payouts to Vivendi shareholders".

The fund added: "These distributions are a major step forward and demonstrate that Vivendi and its management team are able to take into account the interest of its shareholders."

Mr Bolloré has recently tightened his grip on Vivendi , bringing his stake to just over 12 per cent compared with just 5 per cent about a month ago.

Arnaud de Puyfontaine , Vivendi's chief executive, said in a statement yesterday that the increased payouts demonstrated "our willingness to reach consensus with some of our minority shareholders, even if it may result in reduced flexibility for Vivendi".

The agreement would appear to head off the biggest challenge to Mr Bolloré's leadership. Last month, PSAM slammed Vivendi , arguing that its €9bn proposed payout was the best way to reward investors now that it found itself sitting on a cash mountain following asset sales during the past two years of more than €35bn.

"PSAM believes that Vivendi is significantly undervalued due to its excessive cash holdings, inadequate capital return policy and the uncertainty over Vivendi's future use of its capital," it said.

Vivendi is now built around Universal Music Group (UMG), the world's largest recorded music company, and Canal Plus, the pay-TV business.
