Business News: Samsung Says Profit Decline Moderates

SEOUL -- Samsung Electronics Co. on Tuesday delivered fresh evidence its recent profit slide is moderating as it prepares for the global launch of its next flagship smartphone, the Galaxy S6.

The consumer electronics giant said it expects to report about 5.9 trillion Korean won ($5.4 billion) in operating profit for the quarter ended March 31, a decline of 30.5% from the same period a year earlier. Final results are due later this month.

The decline would represent the sixth consecutive year-over-year fall in quarterly profit. However, it is slower than the 36% year-over-year decline in the fourth quarter of 2014 and a 60% plunge in the quarter before that.

The official guidance also is slightly better than the average 35% decline forecast by a Dow Jones survey of eight analysts, a majority of whom expect Samsung's earnings to improve as sales of the Galaxy S6 handset and a curved-edge version called the Galaxy S6 Edge begin in the current quarter.

The two products are widely expected by analysts to outsell Samsung's previous flagship devices and help lift the company's market share and margins.

Lee Seung-woo, an analyst at IBK Securities, estimates that the two new Galaxy S6 smartphones together will sell 57 million units this year, compared with an estimated 38 million of the Galaxy S5.

Mr. Lee added that Samsung's semiconductor business, which has been a consistent source of strength for the company even as its mobile fortunes have fallen, likely helped prop up first-quarter earnings.

To counter cooling demand for its Galaxy lineup of smartphones, Samsung plans to increase the adoption of metal frames in many of its coming models.

Samsung executives have suggested that the company is ready to go back on the offensive after a bruising 2014 in which its profit margins were battered amid heightened competition from Apple Inc. and a handful of Chinese and Indian handset makers.

Margins for Samsung's mobile division, which long flirted with the 20% level, have dipped below 10% of sales in recent quarters. Executives have promised to boost margins into the low double-digit percentage point range in the near future.

Reviews for the Galaxy S6 have been largely positive so far, and investors have pushed up the company's share price in anticipation of strong sales. After two years of declines, Samsung's stock price has climbed 11% higher this year, and at its mid-March peak was just 5% from an all-time closing high.

Samsung on Tuesday also reported estimated revenue of about 47 trillion won for its first quarter, a decline of 12% from the same period a year earlier.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service
