Chinese Domestic Auto Makers Fuel Rise in Sales; Booming demand for local-brand SUVs boost car market despite economic slowdown

SHANGHAI—China's domestic car makers helped power a 9% rise in first-quarter passenger-vehicle sales, showing new strength on the back of booming demand for Chinese sport-utility vehicles despite a softening economy.

Foreign and domestic auto makers sold 5.3 million passenger vehicles in China during the first three months of the year, the China Association of Automobile Manufacturers said Thursday.

The gain was led by Chinese homegrown brands, which reported combined sales of 2.3 million vehicles, up 21% from a year earlier. By contrast, foreign players sold three million vehicles, up just 1% from a year ago.

In the first quarter, the combined share of Chinese brands rose to 43% of the country's passenger-vehicle market from 39% in the same period last year, said the government-backed auto manufacturers' group.

Chinese car makers had lost ground to overseas rivals since 2011, when Beijing withdrew an incentive program for small cars that helped local players. Also, foreign auto makers launched more-affordable cars in past years, entering what had been the domain of Chinese players.

The advance by Chinese brands was largely due to their aggressive launches of low-cost SUVs to cater to consumers who want spaciousness, height on the road and off-road capabilities, analysts said.

LMC Automotive said the rise in popularity of Chinese SUVs offered domestic brands a chance at a “second spring." According to the research firm, Chinese SUV brands had doubled their sales to around 460,000 vehicles in the first two months of this year compared with the same period last year. This was more than foreign SUV brands, which sold around 360,000 vehicles, up 8%.

“Chinese OEMs [car makers] now have a renewed strategic opportunity to excel, which must be maximized in order to prevent history from repeating itself, when foreign rivals flooded the market with lower-priced products, leaving their domestic counterparts with no means of defense," John Zeng, managing director at LMC, said in a recent note.

Wang Guorui, an analyst at Guangzhou-based Ways Consulting, which focuses on the Chinese automotive industry, said demand for SUVs was huge in the country's small cities, where roads are much bumpier than those in larger urban areas.

“As people living in small cities are less wealthy, they are more inclined to accept a Chinese brand," said Mr. Wang.

In the first quarter, eight of the 10 best-selling SUVs were Chinese brands, according to the auto manufacturers' group, including Great Wall Motor Co.'s Haval H6, Chongqing Changan Automobile Co.'s CS35 and Chery Automobile Co.'s Tiggo. All these models are priced below 100,000 yuan ($16,130).

Overall, growth in China's new-car sales eased in the first quarter compared with the year-earlier period, when sales had risen 10%.

The slowdown in the world's largest market for cars had been expected as China's economy has cooled and cities have tightened restrictions on car ownership as they grapple with congestion and pollution. The industry group has forecast an 8% rise in passenger-vehicle sales this year, compared with 9.9% in 2014.

Several foreign car makers have reported slower sales growth in China in the first quarter. General Motors Co. said sales rose 2.2% from a year earlier to 939,203 vehicles, compared with a 12.6% gain in the year-earlier period. Ford Motor Co.'s sales grew 9% to 296,825 vehicles, compared with a 45% increase in the year-earlier period.

Nissan Motor Co. and Honda Motor Co. reported sales gains for the quarter of 4.7% and 0.6%, respectively, compared with gains of 21% and 17% in the year-ago period. Toyota Motor Corp. posted a 0.1% decline in deliveries, compared with a 23% advance a year ago.

Rose Yu and Lilian Lin
