Samsung Works to Remobilize

SEOUL—Amid signs Samsung Electronics Co. might be through the worst of its recent profit declines, it faces another question: Can its new smartphones rebuild the company's mobile profit margins?

With the release on Friday of the Galaxy S6and its curved-screen variant, the Galaxy S6 Edge, investors will be looking for a pickup in profit margins, which crashed last year. After 10 straight quarters with margins of 15% or more, the figure halved to 7.1% in the third quarter of 2014 before edging up in the fourth quarter.

On a conference call with investors last year, Kim Hyun-joon, a Samsung mobile senior vice president, said the company was aiming to push mobile margins back into the “low double-digit" percentage range.

The key to hitting that target will rest with the Galaxy S6 and S6 Edge, which are priced between about $600 and $1,000 without a contract from U.S. carriers.

The pricing of the S6 is largely in line with that of its predecessor—last year's Galaxy S5, which largely fell flat with consumers. But Samsung is hoping the sleek design of the more expensive curved-screen S6 Edge proves to be a strong draw, despite offering few extra features.

Samsung's sharpened focus on design follows the company's admission that it had been “too lazy" with the S5, whose flaws rankled customers.

Shoppers also have welcomed the switch from Samsung's traditional plastic frames to metal and the unique look of the curved screen, a trait that could distinguish the S6 Edge from the increasingly uniform pool of competitors.

The S6 and the S6 Edge are “more design-focused than function-driven," Samsung mobile marketing chief Lee Young-hee said in an interview, underscoring Samsung's bid to take on Apple Inc., the gold standard among design-minded smartphone buyers.

Many analysts say the S6 Edge could outsell the regular S6, assuming production isn't interrupted by any supply-chain issues. The S6 Edge uses a highly sophisticated manufacturing process to get its curved-screen effect.

So far, the phones havegarnered mostly positive reviews, but the product launch comes against a more challenging backdrop than any of its predecessors.

Handset makers using Google Inc.'s Android platform have proliferated and made inroads across Asia, while a reinvigorated Apple has broken sales records with its refreshed iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus.

Lee Sung-woo, an analyst with IBK Securities in Seoul, expects the S6 Edge to outsell its flat-screen counterpart. He expects smartphone sales will lift Samsung's mobile profit margins to 13% as soon as the second quarter of the year—a level he expects the company to be able to maintain through the rest of 2015.

Others expect Samsung's mobile profit margin to fall as low-cost Chinese handset makers continue to undercut Samsung on pricing and drag down selling prices. Jefferies analyst Sundeep Bajikar said some investors forecast Samsung's mobile profit margin will fall to less than 5%.

So far, investors seem to be upbeat about Samsung's prospects. Shares have risen 36% since mid-October, just ahead of a quarterly report showing mobile profit margins at a historical low.

Whether or not the Galaxy S6 Edge scores with consumers, analysts say the curved-screen technology should ensure that Samsung devices stay ahead of fast-moving Chinese handset makers, including Xiaomi Corp. and Huawei Technologies Co., that have matched many of Samsung's earlier features at lower prices. Tom Kang, an analyst with Counterpoint Technology Market Research of Hong Kong, wrote in a recent note to clients that only two companies have the capacity to provide curved screens: LG Display Inc. and Samsung's panel-making unit, Samsung Display Co.

The optimism comes as Samsung on Tuesday delivered evidence that the company's recent profit slide is moderating, saying that it expects to report about 5.9 trillion won, or roughly $5 billion, in operating profit for the quarter ended March 31. That would represent a decline of 31% for a sixth consecutive drop in quarterly profit from a year earlier, but compares with the 36% decline in the fourth quarter of 2014 and the 60% plunge in last year's third quarter. Final results are due later this month.

Samsung likely benefited from the company's semiconductor business, which has been a consistent source of strength for the company even as its mobile fortunes have fallen.
