Ford PHL sales up 40% in March

THE PHILIPPINE unit of US car maker Ford Motor Co. said unit sales rose 40% year on year in March, and 43% in the first quarter.

In a statement, Ford Motor Co. Philippines said it sold 1,877 units last month, "led by strong demand for the Ranger (pickup), Fiesta (small car) and Ford's leading SUV lineup."

The "record" performance for March brought the first-quarter tally to a total of 5,273 units, making it "Ford's best-ever first quarter in the Philippines."

"Our momentum in the first quarter is being driven by our full lineup of global Ford vehicles that is allowing us to become a brand of choice for Filipinos," Ford Philippines Managing Director Kay Hart was quoted in the statement as saying.

"We continue to make progress on our One Ford plan, and together with our dealer partners we remain firmly committed to providing the very best customer and ownership experience."

The EcoSport urban SUV, which was launched n the Philippines a year ago, sold 763 units in March and a total of 2,157 units for the first three months of the year, "making it Ford's best-selling nameplate in the first quarter."

"The EcoSport's combination of sporty design, smart technologies and sensible value proposition have truly helped to create its own space in the market.," Ms. Hart said.

Meanwhile, the Ranger - the best-selling pickup truck in the Philippines in 2014 - saw its March sales increase by 41% year on year to 792 units, and by 27% to 2,058 units in the first quarter, "as demand continues across the full lineup of 13 variants available in the Philippines."

In addition, the Fiesta reported sales last month of 132 units; the premium mid-sized Explorer, 80 units; Escape, 80 units; and Everest, 56 units.

Ford said it remains "on track" with plans to expand its nationwide dealer network to a total of 40 locations this year, from the current 36.

New dealership openings are planned for Malolos, Bulacan; Sta. Rosa, Laguna; Ormoc, Leyte; and Palawan.

"The dealer expansion is part of the company's ongoing efforts to further enhance its customer and ownership experience to support Ford's rapidly growing customer base across the country," Ford said. 
