Blue Origin reports progress Samsung's earnings start to show pulse

Jeffrey P. Bezos's space company said Tuesday that it is a step closer to taking tourists into suborbital space, where they would have the rare chance to experience weightlessness and see Earth from 60-plus miles away.

Executives from Blue Origin, based in Kent, Wash., said they had reached a significant milestone with one of its rocket engines and would begin test flights with the company's reusable New Shepard spacecraft later this year.

In a statement, Bezos, the Amazon.com founder who also owns The Washington Post, said the engine, known as the BE-3, had undergone rigorous testing and "soon we'll put it to the ultimate test of flight." It would be the first hydrogen engine developed in the United States in more than a decade.

In a call with reporters, Blue Origin President Rob Meyerson declined to say when exactly that flight would take place but said it would be later this year. The company's New Shepard capsule can carry three or more astronauts and scientific payloads, he said.

Flights to suborbital space would last 10 to 15 minutes, he said. But the company still has a long way to go, he cautioned, saying there would be a lot of testing before the company flies test pilots and eventually customers, a prospect that is still years away.

Samsung's quarterly operating earnings fell 31 percent from a year earlier, but the drop wasn't as big as expected in a sign the smartphone and computer-chip giant may be emerging from its profit slump.

The company on Tuesday estimated its January-March operating profit at 5.9 trillion won ($5.4 billion), exceeding the average 5.5 trillion won forecast in a FactSet survey of analysts.

Samsung did not give a breakdown of its financial performance, but analysts said robust demand for its mobile chips and improvements in its smartphone business were behind the relative improvement. It will release its full quarterly results later this month.

The company's operating profit was an improvement from the previous two quarters, when its mobile business, which accounts for two-thirds of Samsung's income, suffered from a sales slowdown.

Analysts expect a recovery in Samsung's bottom line in the current quarter as the company is set to launch the latest version of its flagship smartphone, the Galaxy S6, on Friday.

l U.S. planemaker Boeing beat European rival Airbus in net new orders and deliveries in the first quarter, according to figures released Tuesday. Airbus said it had booked gross orders of 121 aircraft in January-March, beating Boeing's 116. After cancellations and conversions, it slipped behind Boeing with 101 net orders as opposed to 110 for Boeing. Airbus logged 134 plane deliveries in the first quarter including one A350, its latest model, and four A380s.

l The original Star Wars trilogy and the prequels will be available on a number of digital video services starting Friday, as announced in an ad spot during the NCAA championship basketball game Monday night. These include iTunes, Amazon Instant Video, Vudu, Xbox Video, Verizon FiOS, Disney Movies Anywhere and Google Play. Others, including M-Go and PlayStation, have also announced they will have the movies available for purchase. To be clear: these are the "special edition" versions - not the theatrical releases. Pre-orders are available now, and prices vary by vendor; for example, Google Play and Apple are selling them for $20 each, while Vudu is selling the whole caboodle for $90.

l The Federal Trade Commission said Tuesday that it will review complaints by consumer groups that YouTube Kids is a hyper-commercial app with junk-food and toy ads flooding the video service. Several consumer advocacy groups filed a complaint with the panel saying YouTube's free app that launched in February contains too many ads that young children can't distinguish from entertainment. On television, federal rules keep advertising to a minimum on children's programs, but on the app and others like it, the groups say those rules are disregarded.

l FedEx has agreed to take over Dutch delivery company TNT Express for $4.8 billion, bolstering its global business with an acquisition that rival UPS had tried - but failed - to complete two years ago. FedEx said Tuesday it has reached a conditional agreement with TNT Express on an all-cash offer of eight euros, or $8.75, per TNT share.

l 7 a.m.: MBA mortgage applications.

l 2 p.m.: Federal Open Market Committee minutes.
