Let the earnings train wrecks begin ; Their losses could be investors' gains

Earnings season is almost here for most companies. But others are hurtling straight into loss season.

There are 15 companies in the Standard & Poor's 500, including oil company Hess, Amazon.com and Mattel, that are expected to lose money in the first quarter, according to a USA TODAY analysis of adjusted earnings data from S&P Capital IQ.

Brace yourself!

Investors are terrified about the first-quarter earnings season, which kicks off today with aluminum maker Alcoa. Companies are expected to post 3% lower profit during the first quarter -- potentially serving as the first warning of a profit recession.

The oil patch has been ravaged by plunging crude prices -- and is the source of much of the expected earnings drop in the first quarter. Nowhere will the pain be felt more than at Hess. The oil company is seen losing $263 million on an adjusted basis during the quarter. That's quite a swing from the $152 million it earned on an adjusted basis a year ago, S&P Capital IQ says. Hess' falling stock price reflects the downward move in profit. The past six months the shares are down 18%.

Online retailer Amazon is often viewed as a profit machine by consumers. It was in the fourth quarter -- when Amazon.com pulled down $263 million on an adjusted basis. Investors want the company to focus less on cool new projects -- and more on making money. That's not looking likely in the first quarter. Amazon is expected to lose an adjusted $72.5 million during the quarter.

Over at solar giant First Solar, investors are bracing for a loss. Analysts are calling for the company to lose an adjusted 28 cents a share. There went $28 million dollars. It's a reversal for a company that's been consistently making money for two years. Profit this year is expected to fall 26%.

The House of Hot Wheels is also about to get dented. Mattel is expected to lose an adjusted $28 million in the first quarter. Barbie needs to pull her weight.

Here's the part where we talk about the twisted world investors live in. All this profit pain could actually be a gain for brave investors.

The companies' first-quarter losses appear to be largely priced into the stocks, say analysts. Analysts see upside for all but three of the stocks. The only first-quarter money-losers where analysts see downside in the stocks are Murphy Oil and oil producer Cimarex Energy. There's no price target on Leucadia.

Analysts are very optimistic about biotech Vertex Pharmaceuticals, though. The 18-month price target on the stock is $132.88 a share, which, if accurate, would be more than 10% upside.

It's important to note that these losses are just projected by analysts, on average, at this point. Most of these companies won't report quarterly results for weeks. Only then will investors know for certain if the estimates for losses were correct. Companies often beat expectations.

No matter what happens, grab your popcorn and get ready to watch some train wrecks. Who knows? Maybe you'll make some money while these companies lose tons of it.
