Breville taps consumer veteran

Appointments: Breville has hand-picked a consumer electronics veteran and former McKinsey executive to be its new chief executive after an extensive eight-month search was sparked by the shock departure of its former CEO last year after the food appliances group unveiled a surprise dip in full-year profit.

Jim Clayton, who is in South Korea where he is executive vice-president of new business for home entertainment company LG Electronics, has also spent time in the private equity world following a 10-year stint with Symphony Technology Group, based in Silicon Valley.

Mr Clayton will take up the reins at Breville on July 1, allowing interim CEO Mervyn Cohen to return to his role as chief financial officer. Breville, 30 per cent-controlled by retail billionaire Solomon Lew’s Premier Investments, was forced to look for a new CEO in August, when Jack Lord stepped down. The exit was a surprise to the market and came after Breville posted an unexpected slide in full-year earnings of 1.9 per cent to $48.8 million.

At the time, Breville chairman Steven Fisher said that, as Breville continued to grow and invest, the business was becoming increasingly global and the board had determined that it needed the best leadership in place to deliver on the company’s global growth strategy.

Mr Clayton has plenty of stamps in his passport, having worked since 2009 for LG, a US private equity fund as well as McKinsey in North America, Germany and Singapore, where he advised Fortune 500 companies on strategy.

“Jim is an experienced executive with a strong background in consumer products, technology and innovation,” Mr Fisher said yesterday. “He also brings with him a track record of success in international markets that are key to Breville’s growth.“Breville’s Food Thinking strategy is to make the home cooking experience a premium experience through innovation and superior quality products. Jim’s mandate will be to build on this strategy by expanding our culinary touch points with the consumer and our global presence.”
