Apple’s Watch and the Tickbait Effect; For sales, it isn’t just about the new smartwatch

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            It isn't clear how many people will line up to buy the pricey Apple Watch. But the ultramodern device may help the technology giant with a rather old-fashion concern: getting more shoppers into its stores.

On Friday, Apple will begin showing off the watch in its retail stores, along with taking preorders online. The device will begin shipping to customers on April 24 in nine countries, including the U.S. and China. Shoppers will need an appointment in the stores to actually try on the different versions of the watch, which start in price at $350, and range as high as $17,000 for limited-edition versions crafted in solid gold.

Those prices put Apple's first smartwatch at a fat premium to rival products, none of which have generated much in the way of sales yet. But while that makes forecasting actual watch sales a challenge, it is a relatively safe bet that many shoppers will flock to Apple's stores to take a look.

And that is good for Apple, at least if history is any guide.

The launch of the first iPad in 2010 drew big crowds to the company's stores, as people sought a peek at the first modern tablet. Apple's retail sales jumped 47% that fiscal year, with average revenue per store rising by 30%. The company cited a “halo effect" in which foot traffic for the iPad also helped sales of the Mac, a product that many believed would actually be cannibalized by the new tablet.

Apple could use a similar boost now. Its retail business has slowed of late, with sales rising only 6% in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 27, and average revenue per store was up only 1%. It added 21 new stores last year, with three quarters of them outside the U.S.

The company no longer reports separate results for retail, but it clearly still has big ambitions for the business. Apple lured former Burberry chief executive Angela Ahrendts in late 2013 to head its retail efforts, and she has reportedly been leading a redesign of the stores ahead of the watch's debut. A redesigned MacBook also goes on sale Friday, which may act as another lure for shoppers.

Extra foot traffic could also help the company meet some rather high expectations. Wall Street expects Apple's revenue to rise 24% in the current fiscal year, which would be its best showing in three years. Such hopes rest largely on the iPhone. But growth is also expected from the Mac and the company's new segment that includes the iPod, Beats headphones and other accessories. The watch, besides its other capabilities, may also act as an expensive form of bait.

                                                                                                            Write to Dan Gallagher at dan.gallagher@wsj.com
