Corporate News: HTC Stays on Track, But Challenges Loom

TAIPEI -- HTC Corp. scored another profitable quarter, although challenges remain in the midtier smartphone market.

HTC said Tuesday its unaudited net profit in the first quarter was 360 million New Taiwan dollars (US$11.6 million), a marked improvement from a net loss of NT$1.88 billion a year earlier but weakening from NT$466 million in the fourth quarter of 2014. Still the result handily beat expectations for NT$155.5 million in net profit for the first quarter, according to a ThomsonReuters poll of analysts.

The company's efforts to cost cuts and a shift of its strategy to sell more midtier smartphones appear to be beginning to pay off. A ThomsonReuters poll of analysts forecasts a much stronger second quarter, when HTC's latest flagship smartphone the One M9 is due to hit the market. They expect net profit in the three months ending June 30 to be NT$1.97 billion and revenue of NT$66.10 billion.

Revenue in the three months ended March 31 totaled NT$41.52 billion, compared with NT$33.12 billion a year earlier and NT$47.9 billion in the previous quarter.

Still, the sales outlook after the second quarter remains murky. Apple Inc. dominates the high-end smartphone market, while low-cost smartphone makers, such as China's Xiaomi Inc., are rapidly growing their market share. That adds to the challenge of slowing global smartphone shipment growth as the market matures.

Last year, sales of HTC's flagship smartphone One M8 tapered off just a couple months after its launch. Chief Financial Officer Chang Chia-lin said at that time he was disappointed sales momentum didn't extend past a quarter.

Some analysts said HTC owes much of its recent recovery to its Desire series, a range of midtier smartphones targeted at emerging-market consumers. A few years ago HTC relied on a few high-end flagship smartphones, but its market share slipped to below 2% from double digits within three years, as Apple's and Samsung Electronics Co.'s dominance of the premium market grew.

Richard Ko, an analyst at KGI Securities, said HTC's new strategy will help lift its earnings as higher production volume helps lower overhead costs per unit, which will in turn boost profit margins.

Market research firm IDC Corp. projects global smartphone shipment will rise 12% this year, slowing from 2014's 26% growth. The increasingly cutthroat nature of pricing could also hurt smartphone makers' revenues, IDC said.

Meanwhile, HTC has been searching for new sources of revenue growth. It recently launched a virtual-reality device and a fitness band. Late last year, the company launched the Nexus 9 tablet with Google Inc., a waterproof action camera and software for taking selfie photos. Those products have helped shore up the company's sales.

HTC, once the world's top smartphone maker by volume, dropped out of the top 10 largest handset vendors by shipments in 2013.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service
