How to Ace an Earnings Call; Some secrets for giving a good earnings call: don’t spring surprises make sure to rehearse

A stock can rise or fall sharply during a quarterly conference call as investors pepper the company's executives with questions about financial results and trade on the news.

The stakes are high enough to make any finance chief sweat. But some of them have found strategies to minimize the risks and keep the quarterly rituals from spiraling out of control.

“The goal of any CFO is not to surprise your investors," said Cisco Systems Inc. CFO Kelly Kramer. Ms. Kramer became finance chief of the networking-gear maker at the beginning of the year, so the company's call in February was her first.

“The simple way that I gauge how successful or not we are is by the amount of follow-up questions that we get. When I look back on the call, the good news was that the questions we got afterward were not clarifying or digging deeper on things that we thought we answered," she said.

Of course, the best arrow a CFO can have in his or her quiver is results that beat Wall Street's estimates. For Ms. Kramer's first call, Cisco reported a 7% jump in quarterly revenue for its second fiscal period ended in January. “That always helps," she said.

Cisco's shares jumped 6% that day in after-hours trading.

Bruce Felt Jr., CFO of software maker Domo Inc., said that the worst calls happen when companies try to overstate the case for their success.

A bad call is “really long…the [chief executive] just goes through win after win after win.…They don't get very specific on what really happened," Mr. Felt said. “There's no insight into the numbers, and they don't have any Q&A."

For many investors and analysts, the question-and-answer part of the call is the main event, and they are generally eager to get past the prepared statements. But, for a CFO, the Q&A can be a nerve-racking ordeal.

“They are literally on stage, and a wrong word or wrong phrase can get some people to move the stock based on a poor explanation. So it is an enormously sensitive platform," said Paul Atkinson, who oversees a $3 billion portfolio for Aberdeen Asset Management.

As a result, investors generally realize that company executives are delivering a very polished version of what happened during the quarter. “I'm sure they're coached, and I wouldn't blame them," he added.

Indeed, many CFOs find it crucial to rehearse for a Q&A session, especially if they expect to get roughed up by analysts. That gives them a chance to practice remaining clear and composed, even if the company's results are bound to disappoint.

It helps to have an investor-relations department that can take Wall Street's pulse and make a good guess about what investors will want to learn from the call, no matter how uncomfortable the subject might be.

Ms. Kramer said mock Q&A sessions are a long-established part of Cisco's preparation for earnings calls.

Effective rehearsals for a conference call also can help the management team more quickly determine who should be answering any given question, said Andy Cronin, finance chief of aircraft-leasing company Avolon Holdings Ltd.

“We've worked together for a very long time, so we know which areas each person will deal with," said Mr. Cronin, who had his first quarterly conference call as a public-company CFO last month. “There's almost a default as to who will answer which kind of question."

Ms. Kramer said that at Cisco, it also comes down to the management team knowing each other, and being able to quickly interpret a meaningful look.

Some market watchers say the format of the typical corporate earnings call may be ripe for a makeover. “The vast majority of companies are just doing the forward-looking statements, and then reading the news release," said Jason Oury, director of global markets intelligence at Ipreo, a firm that provides data and technology to help companies raise money. They are taking “15 minutes of questions, and then bing-bang-boom, you're done in an hour," he said.

Most investors would rather read the news release on their own time and focus on the Q&A, Mr. Oury said. These days, earnings “are released eight different ways" whether by Twitter, Facebook or live webcast, he added.
