Mexican Auto Industry Stays on Record-Setting Track; Production of light cars and trucks in the country rose 13.6%

MEXICO CITY—Mexico-based auto makers logged record production, exports and domestic sales in the first quarter of 2015, industry associations said Wednesday, continuing a trend of sharp growth since the financial crisis.

Production of light cars and trucks in the country rose 13.6% over the same period of 2014 to nearly 850,000 units. More than four of every five of those vehicles were exported, with the U.S. market taking close to half a million of them, said AMIA, Mexico's national auto manufacturers association.

“We depend at the moment on a favorable international market," said Eduardo Solís, president of AMIA. Mexico is now the second-largest source of vehicles imported into the U.S., after Canada. Shipments north of the border have risen more than 12% year-over-year, he said.

Long-established companies like General Motors, Nissan, Ford, Fiat Chrysler and Volkswagen are expanding both plants and production in the country. Honda and Mazda began producing last year at plants in Mexico. Audi, BMW, KIA and Toyota and a Renault-Nissan and Daimler alliance all are either building new factories or have announced plans to do so.

Some of the new arrivals—Audi in particular—have cited Mexico's nearly four dozen free trade agreements as a prime motive for locating here. Though Mexico ships vehicles to some 100 countries, the U.S. and Canada—Mexico's partners in the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement—consistently take more than 80% of Mexico's light vehicle exports.

The European Union, which has had a free-trade pact with Mexico for 15 years, buys a fraction of Mexico's foreign vehicle sales. Of Mexico's top 10 automotive markets, Germany, Belgium and Italy together bought just 3.5% of the total so far this year.

Domestic new car sales, which had been struggling since the crisis, rose 22% to a record 306,000 vehicles in the first quarter, with easier credit and reduced prices helping dealerships clear out backlogged inventory, said Guillermo Rosales, head of the Mexican Auto Distributors Association. Vehicle price increases continue to run below Mexico's inflation rate of about 3%, he noted.

Industry officials long have blamed Mexico's lagging domestic auto market both on financially challenged consumers and on the importation of more than 7.3 million used cars from the U.S. in the past decade. U.S. imports, mostly of vehicles older than 10 years, comprised 77% of the used cars sold across Mexico during that time, Mr. Rosales said.

The officials say that domestic new car sales should be nearly two million annually, about double the 2014 total. Currently, annual care sales in Mexico stand at just 10 vehicles for every 1,000 citizens, far below the 16 per 1,000 inhabitants last year in economically troubled Argentina, Mr. Solis said.

Mexico produced some 3.2 million light vehicles last year, according to the AMIA, which expects more than 4 million vehicles to be built here annually within the next two years, and at least 5 million a year by decade's end, Mr. Solis said.

Write to Dudley Althaus at dudley.althaus@wsj.com
