Corporate confidence falling with oil price, Bank of Canada says; 'Sluggish' survey results peg companies' hiring outlook at lowest level since 2009

The Bank of Canada's conclusion that lower oil prices have dampened corporate confidence about sales growth, investment and hiring doesn't necessarily mean those negative effects will be long lasting, say economists.

"Looking at the details of the (Business Outlook) survey results I think it's consistent with the view that the first quarter of economic growth is going to be very weak, but then as we go through the rest of the year, we'll probably see some improvement," said Craig Alexander, vice-president and chief economist for TD Bank Financial Group.

"One of the things the bank had emphasized in the past was they thought some of the positives that would come out of the drop in oil prices, like the impact from a weaker Canadian dollar, would take some time to materialize.

"In many cases, foreign investors think of Canada as basically a commodity economy, but in actual fact the economy is much more diversified than many people think; and as a consequence, we can weather the fallout of the drop in oil, but it is going to lead to a weaker performance in the economy, particularly in the near term."

Derek Holt, vice-president of capital markets economics at Scotiabank, said the influential poll, which also found the outlook for hiring - although still positive - has fallen to its lowest level since 2009, is "roughly consistent with our forecast for economic growth to mildly rebound toward the 2-per-cent mark later this year and into next year after a rough start so far in 2015. Businesses remain cautiously optimistic that they will witness positive sales growth over the next year."

With the exception of those companies that directly serve the oil patch, Holt believes Toronto businesses may even benefit from current developments.

"For many of them, lower energy prices, low interest rates, a depreciated currency, still strong migration, and an only temporarily interrupted improvement in the U.S. economy should all prove beneficial," he explained.

While oil-rich provinces such as Alberta will certainly experience "the sharpest shift in terms of their economic fortunes," Alexander expects the Ontario economy "to grow in the 2.5 to 3-per-cent range" with rising employment and solid retail performances.

The quarterly sampling of 100 representative companies says uncertainty about the price of oil has dimmed expectations when it comes to future investments in machinery and equipment for the coming year.

On the other hand, the survey found a growing number of companies expected to see lower input costs because of cheaper oil prices - though some anticipated the lower Canadian dollar to partially offset those gains.

The bank says more businesses expected the weaker exchange rate to help boost output prices over the coming 12 months.

Experts are divided on what the survey means for the BoC interest rate.

"We still wouldn't rule out a rate cut in April," said David Madani, economist at Capital Economics.

Douglas Porter, chief economist for the Bank of Montreal, took the opposing view: "We don't believe this sluggish result raised the odds of a follow-up rate cut by the Bank; while we don't dismiss the chances of such, it will take some significant new disappointment to advance the cause."

With files from The Canadian Press
