Hudson’s Bay Profit Triples on Strong Saks Sales; Operator of Saks and Lord & Taylor boosted by digital sales jump

Hudson's Bay Co. on Tuesday posted fourth-quarter sales growth of more than 9%, helped in part by a big jump in digital sales and stronger same-store sales across its banners.

The Toronto-based retailer, operator of the Saks Fifth Avenue and Lord & Taylor stores in the U.S. and Hudson's Bay in Canada, said same-store sales overall were up 3.2% in the quarter ended Feb. 1, including a 2.6% improvement at its Saks Fifth Avenue stores and a 12.1% jump at its discount Off 5th stores.

Hudson's Bay bought Saks in 2013 for $2.9 billion.

The retailer said total sales rose 9.3% to 2.63 billion Canadian dollars ($2.11 billion) from C$2.41 billion a year earlier, in line with the Thomson Reuters mean estimate. Digital sales jumped 35% to C$304 million, it said.

Earnings for the quarter tripled to C$111 million, or 61 Canadian cents a share, but fell shy of analyst expectations for a profit of 72 Canadian cents.

The retailer expects growth in its current fiscal year, guiding for sales of between C$9 billion and C$9.3 billion, up from C$8.2 billion in their last fiscal year and just ahead of the C$8.98 billion analysts are forecasting.

“Sales growth, further progress with the Saks integration and continued strength at HBC Digital has us well-positioned to deliver on our fiscal 2015 strategic priorities and initiatives," Executive Chairman Richard Baker said in a statement.

The company said it plans to invest C$50 million in growth initiatives in its current fiscal year, including an accelerated pace of new store openings at Off 5th, bolstering its digital channel presence and for pre-opening costs related to the 2016 expansion of Saks and Off 5th into Canada.

Early last year, the company said it would open its first two Canadian Saks locations, both in Toronto, in the latter part of 2015.

Last week, Marigay McKee stepped down as president of Saks after just over a year on the job and was replaced by Marc Metrick, was most recently Hudson's Bay's chief administrative officer. Mr. Metrick was instrumental in the company's acquisition of Saks and helped form the strategic plan Saks is now pursuing, including an overhaul of its flagship store on Fifth Avenue and a push to add more upscale offerings.

Write to Judy McKinnon at judy.mckinnon@wsj.com
