Winners’ Circle; PNC Gets the Stock Crown; Earnings focus pays off with 22.9% gain in past year

It's the earnings.

A mutual fund from PNC Capital Advisors wins our quarterly Winners' Circle survey of the best actively managed stock funds.

Doug Roman, assistant fund manager of PNC Large Cap Growth Fund, turned in a 22.9% return in the 12 months ended March 31 by scrutinizing earnings revisions, on which he and his team have a “laserlike" focus. (The fund had been the runner-up in the previous quarterly contest.)

“The correlation between earnings and stock prices tends to be strong over time," he notes, and in the first quarter, tracking earnings revisions was more useful than ever in helping the team identify outperforming stocks and avoid stinkers.

A case in point: Skyworks Solutions Inc., one of the largest holdings in the PNC fund's portfolio, is a semiconductor company that has launched new kinds of wireless chips. It continues to deliver earnings growth—and earnings surprises, as its results for the fiscal first quarter revealed in January: The company reported its profits nearly doubled and, despite upward revisions, beat analysts' estimates.

The Wall Street Journal's quarterly contest rewards the U.S.-stock fund with at least $50 million in assets and a track record of more than three years that posted the best trailing 12-month performance. Index funds and exchange-traded funds don't qualify, because they aren't actively managed; leveraged funds also are disqualified.

Taking it home

Mr. Roman and the PNC fund have profited from the dollar's rise. But rather than making macro bets in currencies or taking top-down bets in sectors or industries within the stock market, his focus on earnings and earnings revisions takes him to corners of the market where the dollar's strength is an advantage, or at least neutral.

“There is a real domestic orientation to our portfolio now," he says. “We didn't anticipate the strength in the dollar, but it emerged as the result of our bottom-up assessment of earnings. We were surprised to see how much the dollar's strength was hurting in many quarters."

For instance, PNC Large Cap Growth contains a company like Dr Pepper Snapple Group Inc., most of whose sales are domestic. Noticeably absent from the list of its largest holdings is a company like Coca-Cola Co., which already has reported that the dollar's gains are taking a bite out of profits. Supermarkets and drugstores like Kroger Co. and CVS Health Corp. are also showing an ability to deliver positive earnings surprises and upward earnings revisions, relatively sheltered from the headwinds created by the dollar, since most of their business is domestic.

“We're not arrogant enough to think we can outperform in every single environment," Mr. Roman says. “But earnings come out four times a year, and we're playing the odds that in a normal environment, investors react to them."

An honorable mention

Meanwhile, this quarter's contest had a fund that did even slightly better than the PNC one, but through the peculiar circumstance of betting on currencies. So while it is notable, the performance didn't qualify as an active stock fund for this round of the contest.

The fund is SEI Dynamic Asset Allocation Fund, and in the 12-month period its bet against the euro and on the dollar was the big driver of a 23.8% gain.

“We knew that the European Central Bank would have to act; that the economy was in worse and worse shape," says Jim Smigiel, the fund's portfolio manager and managing director of SEI's portfolio strategies group. When the ECB moved to cut rates, that sent the euro down against the dollar, especially since the Federal Reserve has signaled its intent to raise rates later this year.

Mr. Smigiel and his team earned their return not from the stocks in the stock component of the fund's portfolio—which is managed as if it were an index fund—but from active bets in the currency markets, including options contracts. Technically, a part of the fund is actively managed; also technically, it is invested in stocks—but the two didn't come together. Still, the fund gets our honorable mention this quarter for identifying the right trend—and for its complex tactical asset-allocation dance.

Ms. McGee is a writer in New England. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.
