Samsung’s Profit Decline Moderates; Quarterly operating earnings fell 31%, less sharply than earlier periods

SEOUL—Samsung Electronics Co. on Tuesday delivered fresh evidence that its recent profit slide is moderating as it prepares for the global launch of its next flagship smartphone, the Galaxy S6.

The consumer electronics giant said it expects to report about 5.9 trillion Korean won ($5.4 billion) in operating profit for the quarter ended March 31, a decline of 30.5% from the same period a year earlier. Final results are due later this month.

The decline would represent the sixth consecutive year-over-year fall in quarterly profit. However, it is slower than the 36% year-over-year decline in the fourth quarter of 2014 and a 60% plunge in the quarter before that.

The official guidance also is slightly better than the average 35% decline forecast by a Dow Jones survey of eight analysts, a majority of whom expect Samsung's earnings to improve as sales of the Galaxy S6 handset and its curved-edge version called the Galaxy S6 Edge begin in the second quarter.

The two products are widely expected by analysts to outsell Samsung's previous flagship devices and help lift the company's market share and profit margins.

Lee Seung-woo, an analyst at IBK Securities, estimates that the two new Galaxy S6 smartphones together will sell 57 million units this year, compared with an estimated 38 million of the previous model, the Galaxy S5.

Mr. Lee added that Samsung's semiconductor business, which has been a consistent source of strength for the company even as its mobile fortunes have fallen, likely helped prop up earnings in the first quarter.

To counter cooling demand for its Galaxy lineup of smartphones, Samsung plans to increase the adoption of metal frames in many of its coming models, stepping away from the plastic bodies that it has long relied on. While the company praised the lightweight, rugged plastic frame, consumers saw it as cheap looking.

Samsung executives have suggested that the company is ready to go back on the offensive after a bruising year in 2014 that saw the company's profit margins battered amid heightened competition from Apple Inc. and a handful of Chinese and Indian handset makers.

The Drama Behind ‘Candy Crush Soda Saga'

Silicon Valley Firms Are Planting Roots in the Farm Belt

Apple's Watch and the Tickbait Effect

Profit margins for Samsung's mobile division, which long flirted with the 20% level, have dipped below 10% of sales in recent quarters. Executives have promised to boost margins into the low double-digit percentage point range in the near future.

So far, reviews for the Galaxy S6 have been positive, and investors have pushed up the company's share price in anticipation of strong sales. After two years of declines, Samsung stock has climbed 11% higher so far this year, and at its mid-March peak was just 5% from an all-time closing high.

Samsung on Tuesday also reported estimated revenue of about 47 trillion won for the first quarter, a decline of 12% from a year earlier.

Write to Min-Jeong Lee at min-jeong.lee@wsj.com and Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com
