Don't kill dividend imputation, Senate inquiry told

The government has been warned not to dump dividend imputation because the scheme has encouraged Australian companies to pay tax at a time when the international community is battling tax avoidance.

Leading tax academic Richard Vann told a parliamentary inquiry that big foreign businesses like the US tech giants were the main culprits in the tax avoidance debate, not Australian companies.

This was because local companies, by proving they paid the right level of tax, could then pass on benefits to shareholders in the form of fully franked dividends. The result was a "natural floor" on tax avoidance by Australian-based companies such as banks and supermarkets.

"The imputation system creates an incentive for our companies to pay tax," Professor Vann told a Senate inquiry in Sydney.

"If they want to pay franked dividends to shareholders they have to pay Australian corporate tax.

"The real risks for Australia are mainly the foreign corporates. Their shareholders get no benefit out of imputation."

But it was this system of dividend imputation that the government appeared to want to get rid of through its tax white paper process, Professor Vann added.

"Reading between the lines in the tax discussion paper, Treasury wants to kill imputation," he said. "Of the countries around the world we're one of the countries affected the least because the imputation system creates an incentive for our companies to pay tax."

Professor Vann said Australia collected $65 billion in corporate tax. But of that, only $24 billion was retained. Much of the rest was distributed as imputation credits to Australian resident shareholders.

The tax paper argues that dividend imputation, which gives retail shareholders a credit for company tax paid, was too costly and too complex, and cutting back the benefit should be considered.

Treasurer Joe Hockey has said the tax system relied too heavily on corporate income tax when capital in the digital world was increasingly mobile.

Mr Hockey said a lower company tax rate would reduce the incentive for tax planning and profit shifting from Australia. But tax commissioner Chris Jordan said a lower company tax would not stop tax avoidance by technology giants such as Google, because these companies argue Australia has no right to tax certain of their profits at all.

The commissioner said the tax office has "12 significant, deep audits going on right now with 12 major technology companies".

Asked if a lower company rate, possibly funded by the winding back of dividend imputation, would stop avoidance, Mr Jordan told the ABC late on Tuesday that it would not because the tech companies argue the applicable tax rate is zero.

"The argument goes the lower the rates the less likely people are to have contrived and artificial structures, but I should say in this whole high-tech area, in e-commerce, their argument is there's just no tax," Mr Jordan told the ABC's The Business.

"So it doesn't matter what the rate is, they're saying Australia does not have the right to tax the profits that are delivered by their servers in a digital fashion - that's a different argument, they've taken the lot off the table."
