Electrolux Issues Warning On Profit; Executive Quits

STOCKHOLM -- The head of Electrolux AB's North American major-appliances unit quit Wednesday after the Swedish company issued a profit warning for the unit.

Electrolux said first-quarter results for the business would come in significantly lower than expected as its refrigeration and freezer-making operations continued to be affected by changes to meet new U.S. energy-efficiency requirements, and because of a slower-than-expected production increase at its plant in Memphis, Tenn., that makes ovens.

The company said it would need most of 2015 before its program to restore profitability and increase efficiency at the U.S. business bears fruit.

The company's shares in Stockholm closed down 6.5% after the announcement. Karri Rinta, an analyst at Handelsbanken, said this had more to do with the news about the length of time Electrolux said it would need to return the unit to profitability than the profit warning itself, which many had expected.

Electrolux said Jack Truong, head of the North American major-appliances unit and an executive vice president, has resigned to pursue other interests. Chief Executive Keith McLoughlin will run the unit until a successor is found, Electrolux said.

The troubles in the North American major-appliances business began in the third quarter of last year and have lingered, despite the company issuing guidance for an improvement. In connection with its fourth-quarter earnings report, Electrolux said profitability would be likely to improve during the second quarter of this year.

"If you look at how the company has communicated this, it is clear that they have not had full insight into the developments in North America," said Handelsbanken's Mr. Rinta said.

Electrolux last year agreed to buy General Electric Co.'s appliances business in a $3.3 billion deal that will almost double the company's U.S. footprint and put Electrolux head-to-head with the largest U.S. appliance maker, Whirlpool Corp.

The Swedish company said Wednesday that preparations for the integration of the GE business are progressing well and it remains confident that the transaction will be closed in 2015. It also said it has identified additional synergies of $50 million in excess of the previously communicated $300 million.

In January, Electrolux said fourth-quarter operating income in its North American major-appliances business fell 70% to 134 million Swedish kronor ($15.4 million) from 453 million kronor in the year-earlier period; net profit for the period for the whole company totaled 970 million Swedish kronor.

Electrolux will publish its full report for the first quarter on April 24.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service
