Smartphone Maker HTC Keeps Its Recovery Rolling

TAIPEI—HTC Corp. added another profitable quarter to its recovery effort, although challenges remain in the midtier smartphone market.

The company said Tuesday its unaudited profit in the first quarter was 360 million New Taiwan dollars (US$11.6 million), a marked improvement from a net loss of NT$1.88 billion a year earlier and well ahead of analysts' expectations.

HTC has been cutting costs and shifting its strategy to sell more midtier smartphones. Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters are pointing to a much stronger second quarter, when HTC's latest flagship smartphone, the One M9, is due to hit the market. They expect a net profit of NT$1.97 billion and revenue of NT$66.10 billion.

First-quarter revenue totaled NT$41.52 billion, up from NT$33.12 billion a year earlier.

Still, the sales outlook after the second quarter remains murky. Apple Inc. dominates the high-end smartphone market, while low-cost smartphone makers, such as China's Xiaomi Inc., are rapidly expanding their market share. That adds to the challenge of slowing growth in global smartphone shipments as the market matures.

Last year, sales of HTC's flagship One M8 smartphone tapered off just a couple months after its launch. Chief Financial Officer Chang Chia-lin said at that time he was disappointed that the sales momentum didn't extend beyond a quarter.

HTC, once the world's top smartphone maker by volume, dropped out of the top 10 largest handset vendors by shipments in 2013.

Some analysts said the company owes much of its recent recovery to its Desire series, a range of midtier smartphones targeted at emerging-market consumers. HTC once relied on a few high-end flagship smartphones, but its market share slipped to below 2% from double digits within three years, as Apple and Samsung Electronics Co. asserted their dominance of the premium market.

Richard Ko, an analyst at KGI Securities, said HTC's new strategy will help lift its earnings as higher production volume helps lower overhead costs per unit, which will in turn boost profit margins.

Market research firm IDC Corp. projects global smartphone shipments will rise 12% this year, off from 2014's 26% growth. The increasingly cutthroat nature of pricing could also hurt smartphone makers' revenues, IDC said.

Meanwhile, HTC has been searching for new sources of revenue growth. It recently launched a virtual-reality device and a fitness band. Late last year, the company launched the Nexus 9 tablet with Google Inc., a waterproof action camera and software for taking selfie photos. Those products have helped shore up the company's sales.
