Wal-Mart’s Mexico Unit Logs Strongest Sales Growth in Over Two Years; Walmex says first-quarter sales were up 9.3%

MEXICO CITY—Retailer Wal-Mart de Mexico reported on Tuesday its strongest sales growth in more than two years, with January-March sales rising 9.3% from the year-earlier period.

Walmex, as the unit of Arkansas-based Wal-Mart Stores Inc. is also known, said sales totaled 110.9 billion pesos ($7.4 billion) in the first three months of the year, with sales in Mexico up 7% and those in Central America 23% higher than a year earlier.

It was the biggest rise since the third quarter of 2012, when sales rose 11%, and marked a rebound for the retailer, which has been struggling with declining numbers of shoppers visiting its stores and sluggish consumption in Mexico.

Sales momentum from the first two months of the year continued into March, with same-store sales in Mexico up 4.5% from the year-earlier month despite a negative calendar effect. The number of customers was down 1.7% in March, although customers spent 6.2% more on average per visit.

The same-store sales growth for Mexico was above the 2.9% consensus of analysts polled by Mexican financial news service Infosel.

Same-store sales measure the performance at stores that have been open for at least one year. The company had 2,229 stores operating in Mexico at the end of March, and 692 in Central America.

Same-store sales growth has taken on special significance for the company this year, given its limited store expansion plan, the Ve Por Mas bank said in a note ahead of the sales report. Sales growth “would be a good sign of a possible recovery in consumption," Ve Por Mas added.

Walmex said last month it plans to expand its floor space by 2.4% this year, adding 162,000 square meters, down from the 258,000 square meters added in 2014.

Walmex shares traded on the Mexican stock exchange closed up 0.6% Tuesday at 39.20 pesos, a 26% gain in the past year. The company plans to report its first-quarter financial results on April 21.

Write to Anthony Harrup at anthony.harrup@wsj.com
