Hurting oil prices push down U.S. corporate profits; Effects felt across industries as earnings season kicks off

NEW YORK -- Tumbling oil prices and a stronger U.S. dollar are pushing down U.S. corporate profits for the first time in more than five years, hurting companies from Exxon Mobil to Wal-Mart Stores.

First-quarter earnings per share for companies in the Standard & Poor's 500 Index may have fallen about 5.8 per cent, according to estimates compiled by Bloomberg, in the first year-over-year decline since 2009's third quarter.

As earnings season gets its unofficial start this week with Alcoa Inc., the biggest drag will come from a 63-per-cent profit decline at energy companies. Oil prices have fallen by about half from a year ago as companies pumped their way into a global glut, and the dollar's climb of about 25 per cent against a basket of currencies since last summer has chipped away at revenue for firms such as United Technologies Corp.

"There are all these cross currents going on right now heading into earnings season," said Todd Lowenstein, who helps manage $16 billion (U.S.) at HighMark Capital Management Inc. "You're going to have at least on paper a technical earnings recession, meaning two consecutive quarters of negative growth, in the first and second quarters."

The effects ripple across industries. U.S. Steel last month announced plans to shut an Illinois mill partly on falling demand from the energy companies. The dollar's surge helped make steel imports cheaper, hurting producers such as Nucor. At Dow Chemical, profit is poised to drop as plastics prices decline with oil and farmers buying fewer chemicals because their crops are selling for less.

United Technologies has said it expects foreign exchange to cut $100 million from first-quarter profit on sales of its jet engines, elevators and air conditioners. "That still remains the biggest watch item for me," chief financial officer Akhil Johri told investors on March 12.

The slowdown is showing in some U.S. economic reports. The Labor Department has reported that employers added 126,000 jobs in March, the fewest since December 2013.

Once energy companies are pulled out of the picture, S&P earnings look a bit better, with a projected rise of 1.9 per cent. Alcoa is poised to report a higher profit in part because of rising aluminum demand from automakers and airlines - two industries that are both benefiting from lower oil prices. Profits at auto manufacturers and their suppliers may jump 42 per cent, the estimates show.

"People know that energy prices are down, they know the dollar's up," said Jim Paulsen, chief investment strategist at Wells Capital Management, which oversees $338 billion. "What is less known here is what does the earnings performance look like outside the energy industry."

Low gasoline prices are helping Wal-Mart partially counter the negative effects of foreign exchange and the inventory shortages caused by the West Coast port strike, said Poonam Goyal, an analyst at Bloomberg Intelligence.
