Kaisa Says Curbs on Property Sales Have Been Partially Lifted; Embattled Shenzhen firm’s projects still remain frozen by local court orders

SHANGHAI—Struggling property developer Kaisa Group Holdings Ltd. said Thursday that authorities in Shenzhen have partially removed a restriction on sales of its residential units, though they remain frozen by local court orders.

Authorities released for sale about 58% of Kaisa's units in terms of floor area from seven projects as of April 7, according to calculations from a filing posted on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange website. They also released units in an eighth project held for rental.

Property in four of the seven sales projects totaling 93,515 square meters remained blocked by the authorities. In addition, all eight of the projects were still subject to the court-ordered freeze, covering a total 145,232 square meters.

In the filing, Kaisa said authorities haven't told the company why it decided to ease the restrictions.

A representative for the company declined to provide further comment Thursday. Representatives for the local authorities didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.

Since November, the Urban Planning Land and Resources Commission in Shenzhen has blocked units in 11 of Kaisa's projects in the southern Chinese city. The developer and local authorities haven't provided any explanation for the moves.

Several Kaisa executives and employees have left the company in past months, including its founder and longtime chairman, Kwok Ying Shing. The company has said Mr. Kwok resigned for “health reasons" and declined to comment further.

"We view the lifting of some blockages positively as it indicates that authorities are seemingly being less obstructive," said Charles Macgregor, head of Asia at Lucror Analytics.

The Shenzhen-based developer has been seeking concessions from its creditors over $2.5 billion in offshore debt, as well as over its onshore borrowings, to expedite a bailout bid by another property developer, Sunac China Holdings Ltd.

The partial lifting of the restrictions is “a step forward as it fulfills Sunac's conditions for the takeover," said Franco Leung, an analyst at Moody's Investors Service. He added that a resumption of sales would also be good for Kaisa's creditors.

Chinese property developers have been struggling with weakened sales and rising inventory since last year as the economy has slowed. Kaisa's woes are largely believed to stem from a reported corruption investigation and the developer has become a poster boy for the risks of investing in the Chinese property market. In October, state media reported that Jiang Zunyu, a former high-ranking official in Shenzhen's Longgang district—where many of Kaisa's projects are located—was under investigation. Chinese President Xi Jinping has been waging an antigraft campaign that has identified and punished officials linked to real-estate corruption, among other misdeeds.

Kaisa's onshore creditors appear to be persisting with their claims even as the developer has said it was looking to restructure debt. As of April 7, around 14.8 billion yuan ($2.4 billion) in assets had been frozen by local courts following petitions from its onshore creditors, an increase from the 13.8 billion yuan reported in March. The developer said it was served court papers in Shenzhen and Dalian for lawsuits over disputes in loan agreements with creditors including China Everbright Bank Co., Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd. and China Cinda Asset Management Co., according to the latest filing.

Kaisa, which defaulted on a $51.6 million loan from HSBC Holdings PLC in January, said last week it was delaying the release of its 2014 results as its auditors required more time to assess the company's cash-flow position and other items. Shares of Kaisa remained suspended pending the release of the earnings.

The company last month said it expects a loss for 2014, a reversal from a net profit of 2.86 billion yuan ($456 million) in 2013.

Write to Esther Fung at esther.fung@wsj.com and Chester Yung at chester.yung@wsj.com
