Nestlé Pours Millions More Into Bottled Water; More exotic flavors and new plant investment is coming as water begins to overtake soda sales

VEVEY, Switzerland—Nestlé SA aims to exploit growing health concerns about soda as it rolls out new products and boosts investment in the huge U.S. market to improve the profitability of its global water business.

Vevey-based Nestlé is launching more flavored versions of its sparkling waters—including a green-apple flavor for Perrier and a cherry-lemon flavor for Poland Spring—to capitalize on growing consumer wariness toward both sugary and diet sodas. Many of its new products will be sold in redesigned slim cans aimed at freshening the brand.

The Swiss food giant is doubling down on the U.S., where it will build seven production lines this year and invest as much as $200 million. The new production capacity is roughly twice what the company has added in the past five years combined.

Marco Settembri, chief executive of Nestlé Waters, said the company's strategy is supported by a recent market shift: Sales of water have grown rapidly and could overtake carbonated soft drinks in the U.S. by volume by 2017, according to the Beverage Marketing Corp. “They want bubbles," Mr. Settembri said of people who have given up soda. “But they want healthy bubbles."

Nestlé's efforts come as the food giant is attempting to boost the performance of its low-margin water business. Nestlé Waters generates a 9.7% margin, the lowest in the Nestlé empire. Overall, Nestlé's margin is 15.3%.

Fixing the water business is important because it generates 8% of Nestlé's overall sales of 91.6 billion Swiss francs ($95.38 billion). It is also a bedrock component of Nestlé's push into health and wellness, which has led the company to remove artificial coloring from such U.S. candy bars as Crunch and Butterfinger.

Nestlé's sparkling water business, which includes San Pellegrino, represents a growing opportunity. In 2014, Nestlé's sparkling waters grew 14% in the U.S., much faster than the 8% growth for its still waters, including Pure Life, according to Tim Brown, chief executive of Nestlé Waters North America.

But Nestlé's brands face mounting challenges from supermarket and private-label brands, which are usually cheaper than branded products and account for about 25% of the $13 billion U.S. bottled-water wholesale market.

Nestlé has also faced protests in the U.S. over its bottled-water business, particularly in Sacramento, Calif., where the company has come under fire for producing bottled water in the face of the state's drought.

Mr. Brown said Nestlé wasn't one of the biggest water users in the Sacramento area and paid the same prices as other water users. He said bottled water is also very efficient, producing one gallon of bottled water for each 1.3 gallons used.

Analysts say Nestlé, which has a 35% share of the U.S. market, will also face competition from Coca-Cola Co. and PepsiCo Inc., which command 20% of the market between them.

“Water is a healthy drink compared with sodas, so that can help sell it," said Patrik Schwendimann, an analyst at Zuercher Kantonalbank. “But Coke and Pepsi aren't going to just let this happen and will likely launch more products to compete."

A Coke spokesman said the company sees great potential for profitable growth in bottled water, “which is why we continue to focus on building our successful Dasani and Smartwater brands."

PepsiCo said that its Aquafina water business delivered a strong performance in the U.S. in 2014 and the company is looking forward to “sustainable, long-term growth."

Write to John Revill at john.revill@wsj.com and Mike Esterl at mike.esterl@wsj.com
