Bear shows its teeth ; Earnings could be in the red for first time since 2009

Analysts are the most bearish on U.S. corporate profits since the end of the financial crisis six years ago, creating angst on Wall Street as the first-quarter earnings season gets sets to kick off.

Earnings fears are the latest worry to rattle Wall Street, which is already on edge from Friday's weaker-than-expected reading on March job creation, uncertainty about the timing of Federal Reserve interest rate hikes and a U.S. economy that experienced a soft patch in the first three months of the year because of wicked winter weather, less capital spending in the depressed oil patch and fewer exports resulting from the fallout of a strong dollar.

"Expect turbulence ahead," says John Stoltzfus, chief investment strategist at Oppenheimer. "Anticipation of the start of first- quarter earnings season on Wednesday could add to tension, as well."

On Monday, at least, the tension didn't seem to have any effect, as the Dow Jones industrial average jumped 118 points, or 0.7%, to 17,881 following the long holiday weekend.

With the unofficial kickoff to the first-quarter earnings season set for Wednesday after the closing bell when aluminum giant Alcoa reports, Wall Street is bracing for what could be the first quarter of earnings contraction since the third quarter of 2009.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect earnings growth from companies in the Standard & Poor's 500 index to contract 2.8% in the first quarter vs. a year ago, which is far below the initial projection of +5.3% back on Jan. 1. Five S&P 500 companies report earnings this week.

The aggressive slashing of quarterly earnings estimates by analysts has lowered the bar significantly, perhaps low enough to make it easier for companies to top expectations, Andrew Burkly, an analyst at Oppenheimer, told clients.

Companies will face a "low hurdle as analysts (are the) most bearish since (the) end of (the) financial crisis," Burkly said in a research report. "The consensus estimates for the first quarter are manageable and should be easily surpassed."

Burkly believes companies outside the hard-hit energy patch will be able to post strong enough earnings to offset the big drag on the S&P 500's overall earnings caused by the big drop in earnings in the energy sector caused by a 50%-plus drop in U.S. crude prices. He expects overall S&P 500 profits to top the "downbeat" consensus by anywhere from 3 to 5 percentage points, which would enable the index to post a positive quarter of profit growth.

The question now is whether the economic headwinds are temporary, paving the way for a resumption of growth going forward.
