Co-op Group back in profit after disastrous losses in 2013

Chief executive Richard Pennycook says work to rebuild the society is underway as it reveals profits of £216m last year and reduces debts

The Co-operative Group has returned to profit and reduced its debt mountain as it seeks to draw a line under a tumultuous period in its history.

Its chief executive, Richard Pennycook, declared that the “rescue phase” of the turnaround was complete. “The hard work of rebuilding the Co-operative Group for the next generation... is now underway.”

However, Britain’s biggest mutual, which is owned by 8.5 million members and was founded in 1844, told members on Thursday that they would have to wait until the end of 2017 for a resumption of dividend payments, when the three-year recovery plan ends. The last payment, of £34m, was made in 2013.

The group’s profit before member payments was £124m last year, with revenues of £9.4bn. The Co-op benefited from a £216m gain on the sale of its pharmacy and farming businesses. This compares with a £2.3bn loss in 2013 following the discovery of a £1.5bn black hole at its banking arm and its part-disposal along with a writedown of the value of the group’s Somerfield store chain.

In a disastrous year, the Co-op Bank came close to collapse and lost its mutual status. It was rescued by bondholders, led by US hedge funds, while the Co-op Group’s stake was reduced to a minority holding of 20%. The bank’s former chairman, Paul Flowers, nicknamed the Crystal Methodist, was fined for drug possession last spring. The Co-op Group’s former chief executive Euan Sutherland was forced to quit in March after a furore over his pay.

Pennycook said that without the profit from the pharmacy sale and property disposals, the Co-op would “at best, have broken even”. The group, which is now focused on food, funerals, insurance and legal services, also reduced its borrowings to £808m from £1.4bn.

There are some encouraging signs in the Co-op’s food business, which recorded like-for-like sales growth of 0.4%. Within this, sales at smaller convenience stores grew 3.2%. It is the UK’s fifth biggest food retailer with almost 2,800 convenience and medium-sized stores. The group opened 82 new convenience stores and refurbished more than 700 shops last year. It hopes to add another 100 convenience stores this year. At the same time, it plans to slim down its portfolio of 717 larger stores by disposing of up to 75 sites a year, after selling 37 last year.

Pennycook said the store revamp was starting to pay off, with refurbished stores seeing “high single-digit uplifts in sales”. He added: “Where we want to grow is in the convenience part of the market, and in that part of the market we’re growing market share.”

The former Asda and Royal Mail boss Allan Leighton, whose father ran a Co-op store, was recently appointed as the society’s first independent non-executive chairman after a shake-up of its governance structure. He is putting together a new smaller, plc-style board, composed of a majority of independent directors.

They are expected to be appointed ahead of the group’s annual meeting in May, with further elected directors set to join the board following the meeting. About 2.9 million members are eligible to vote at the AGM. They will be asked whether the society should continue to make donations to the Co-operative party, which is affiliated to the Labour party.
