Coal India: Higher e-auction sales, overall output to boost profitability

The news of coal ministry removing the cap on Coal India's e-auction sales enthused investors, leading to a 5.7% jump in its stock which closed at Rs 380 on Wednesday.

The e-auction sales that fetch higher realisations and add to profitability of the company had been capped at seven% of overall volumes by the government in order to meet coal requirements of the power sector.

Now the government has allowed Coal India to revert to the old system where there was no cap on the e-auction sales. As a result, e-auction sales should see some upside and for at least 10-12% of total sales, going ahead.

In the past, e-auction volumes hovered around 10-12% range. Importantly, though a small part of overall volumes, e-action sales contribute to about 35-40% of total EBITDA. Hence, higher e-auction volumes would mean higher profitability leading to earning upgrades for Coal India.

Analysts at ICICI Securities say that assuming e-auction volumes at 10% of off-take for both FY16 and FY17, they expect EBITDA to increase 6.5% and 4.4%, respectively (compared to their earlier estimates).

They further add that 10% was a general benchmark, it was not sacrosanct in nature, as earlier there have also been instances when e-auction volumes had exceeded 10% of volume citing FY14 when e-auction sales stood at 58 million tonnes (MT) or 12.3% of total sales of 472 MT.

Hence, they believe there exists an upside risk to earnings with respect to the e-auction volume in FY16 and FY17. The analysts thereby have increased their target price for the Coal India stock to Rs 425 from Rs 415. In this backdrop, one may also see some upgrades in the Bloomberg consensus target price that stood at Rs 392, as per analysts polled in the month of March.

The coal ministry's decision also seems to have been influenced by the fact that Coal India is seeing inventory build-up. During FY15, while company achieved 494.23 MT, which was 97% of the production target of 507 MT, it's off-take stood at 489.34 MT or 94% of targeted 520 MT partly due to evacuation issues.

The demand for e-auction coal, however, has been increasing from players who had lost captive mines or do not have captive supplies. Analysts believe that even if newly allocated mines start contributing about 40 MT (to start with) in first year and continue growing output, it would still take a few years to fill the gap between domestic demand and availability.

Currently, India imports over 150 MT of coal every year and rising power generation capacities and the need to feed existing underutilised plants mean that the gap will remain.

Not surprisingly that the government has set ambitious targets for Coal India, the country's monopoly miner. While it has set a production target of 550 MT for Coal India for FY16, that for 2020 is set at one billion tonnes. While efforts to boost Coal India's production are being taken, steps to counter infrastructure bottlenecks (for evacuation to users of coal) are also under way.

Analysts at Nomura say that persisting impetus for greater engagement between Central / State / Local authorities to address factors constraining Coal India's output bode well, in our view.

They also expect a reasonable hike in FSA (fuel supply agreement) coal prices over the next 12-18 months (ahead of wage revisions due in FY2017) and EBITDA margin to be supported by recent moderation of diesel prices.

Though some overhang of government's divestment of stake in the company may lead to temporary blips in the stock, analysts believe Coal India remains a good long-haul story.

Meanwhile, for the quarter ending March'15, analysts at Centrum Broking expect the company's sales to increase by 4.1% year-on-year to Rs 5,386 crore with EBITDA growing 5.5% on the back of some improvement in e-auction volumes. Net profit is expected to rise by 6.6% to Rs 4,727 crore.
