Walgreens Posts Higher Earnings, Expands Restructuring Program; Sales in the February quarter helped by a severe cold season

Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc. on Thursday said it would close 200 domestic stores as part of an expansion of its restructuring program.

The pharmacy also reported that sales rose 35.5% in the February quarter, helped by a severe cold season.

Shares added 1.15% in light premarket trading.

Executive Vice Chairman and Acting Chief Executive Stefano Pessina said Walgreens would pursue additional cost savings in its Retail Pharmacy USA segment—which includes the Duane Reade and Walgreens brands—and hoped to save $1.5 billion by the end of 2017, more than double its original project of $500 million in savings.

The company added that it is still looking for a permanent chief executive and working with a recruiting firm. Former Chief Executive Greg Wasson retired after the drugstore chain's acquisition of Alliance Boots GmbH.

For the year ending in August, Walgreens predicts earnings per share between $3.45 and $3.65. Analysts had expected $3.61 a share. The company also affirmed its earnings outlook for fiscal 2016.

Walgreen completed its two-part acquisition of European pharmacy company Alliance Boots earlier this year. The combination created a pharmacy empire with more than 12,800 locations in 11 countries and a vast drug distribution business. Walgreen, the largest U.S. pharmacy chain by stores, also changed its name to Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc. and its stock symbol to WBA from WAG.

For the latest quarter, sales in the Retail Pharmacy USA division rose 6.9% excluding newly opened or closed locations. Prescriptions filled increased 5%. Prescription sales accounted for 64.4% of total sales in the quarter, driven by a strong cold and flu season.

Overall, Walgreens posted a profit of $2.06 billion, or $1.93 a share, up from $716 million, or 74 cents a share, a year earlier. Excluding special items, earnings were $1.18 a share, compared with 97 cents a year earlier.

Sales grew to $26.6 billion from $19.6 billion.

Analysts had expected sales of $27.78 billion and per-share earnings of 95 cents.

On Wednesday, drugstore rival Rite Aid Corp. reported that its earnings surged in the latest quarter thanks to a $1.72 billion tax credit, but the pharmacy chain offered muted guidance for its recently started business year.

Write to Angela Chen at angela.chen@dowjones.com
