Tesla’s Model S Gets an Upgrade; Electric-car maker lifts features and battery life on sedan in advance of releasing all-new vehicle

Tesla Motors Inc. is upgrading the slower-selling version of its Model S electric sedan, equipping it with a more capable battery, all-wheel drive and a bigger price tag.

The move comes as the Palo Alto, Calif.-based auto maker is racing to meet a steep sales target set for 2015 and down the road. Tesla said on Friday it sold a record 10,300 cars in the first quarter, but it needs to pick up the pace and average 15,000 vehicles a quarter to hit this year's 55,000 goal.

The introduction of the new base model could give a boost to Tesla's sales ahead of the launch of the Model X sport-utility vehicle in the second half of the year.

Tesla will immediately stop selling the $71,000 Model S with a 60-kilowatt-hour battery that has served as its base model for most of the car's history. A new $75,000 version, carrying a 70-kilowatt-hour battery and capable of driving 15% further on a charge, will be sold in its place.

Global Equities Research analyst Trip Chowdhry said the move should drive more sales. He estimated that about 10% of Tesla's sales have come from the base, 60-kilowatt-hour model. He said he believes the announcement means Tesla is beginning to benefit from economies of scale on motors and batteries and can afford to make the move without hurting profit.

Mark Spiegel, a hedge-fund manager for Stanphyl Capital Partners LP who has a short-interest position on Tesla shares, said Tesla is cutting its margins in favor of driving up demand.

“This is essentially a $6,250 price cut on the S85D," Mr. Spiegel said in an email. “No company would ever put through this kind of a price cut if demand were truly not a problem."

Tesla has insisted that demand remains strong for its cars.

The upgraded version, dubbed 70D, will be sold along with 85-kilowatt-hour versions of the Model S. While Tesla doesn't break out specific numbers, the company has said the higher-end version handily outsells the departing 60-kilowatt-hour version.

This is the second time since the Model S went on sale in 2012 that Tesla has discontinued its lowest-range offering. Tesla's original 40-kilowatt-hour version had a range of around 150 miles, but the company quickly stopped selling it as it was seen as being too limited.

Tesla said the 70D is a more competent offering. Capable of 240 miles on a charge, it is equipped with all-wheel-drive, which is a coveted feature in Northeastern U.S. and in Europe.

The 70D could be an attractive alternative to the 85-kilowatt-hour version starting at $82,500 (the one not equipped with all-wheel drive). All-wheel-drive is a $5,000 option on the 85 kilowatt-hour version.

The new base model will also include the equipment needed to use the company's U.S.-wide network of “superchargers" that allow drivers to recharge for free in 30 minutes or less. Now standard equipment, that hardware used to be an option on base models.

The 70D version has a top speed of 140 miles an hour and acceleration to 60 mph in 5.2 seconds. It doesn't include the “insane" acceleration button that generates additional torque in the P85D model. Tesla also added a few new colors.

The car also comes with a suite of sensors and cameras and safety features that include forward collision braking, and with a forthcoming software update, will allow the car to drive itself on the highway.

Tesla Chief Executive Elon Musk said recently that he felt that 200 miles of electric range was the minimum required to make an electric vehicle viable, but a range of 250 miles is more ideal.

The company is planning to offer a 200-mile-range entry level car called the Model 3. It is due out in 2017. Tesla aims to sell the Model 3 for $35,000 and up. Tesla hasn't said whether it will offer longer-range versions of that car, like it does with the Model S.
