Lopez-led conglomerate's income rises 140% powered by new plants

HIGHER revenues from its power business allowed First Philippine Holdings Corp. (FPH) to more than double its profit last year, the Lopez-led holding firm said in a disclosure yesterday.

The group's net income reached P14.6 billion in 2014 - of which P5.6 billion was attributable to equity holders of the parent.

The attributable profit surged by 140%, or P3.3 billion compared to 2013, as this was fueled by the 14% revenue increase, according to FPH.

"Electricity sales jumped P4 billion or 5% driven by EDC's (Energy Development Corp.) Bacman, Nasulo and Burgos wind plants that went online in 2014," the disclosure read.

The Bacman geothermal power station - which straddles Bacon, Sorsogon and Manito, Albay - is currently running at 140 megawatts (MW) following turbine replacement and a series of rehabilitation works last year.

The 49.4-MW Nasulo geothermal plant in Negros Oriental also started commercial operations in September last year.

Last year, EDC also completed the 150-MW Burgos wind farm in Ilocos Norte marking the company's maiden venture into wind energy.

In its disclosure yesterday, FPH also noted a 49% improvement on contracts and services, which was due to the earnings of First Balfour, Inc. - its construction arm - from the Burgos wind project; and the Avion and San Gabriel projects.

All those projects are being undertaken by subsidiaries of power firms First Gen Corp. and EDC.

FPH's Board of Directors, in a meeting held yesterday, also approved a P1.4-billion investment in First Philippine Properties Corp.

The cash infusion, according to the disclosure, will be used for land and related acquisitions.

"Part of the funds is intended for the purchase of the property located at the Philtown Industrial Park," FPH said.

FPH won the private bidding for a 46-hectare property within that industrial estate in Tanauan City, Batangas last January.

FPH is the holding firm for the Lopez Group's power, property and construction businesses. It also holds the remaining 3.95% interest of the group in Manila Electric Co. (Meralco), the country's largest distribution utility.

Shares of FPH ended at P98.80 apiece yesterday, down 20 centavos or 0.20% from P99 apiece on Tuesday. 
