Pier 1 Profit Falls 22%, But Share Price Rises; Home goods retailer sees sales at existing locations rising about 4% in current quarter.

Pier 1 Imports Inc.'s profit fell 22% in the February quarter, but the home goods retailer said spring products generated a strong response and projected sales at existing locations would increase about 4% in the current quarter.

The company had previously warned that increased costs related to distribution centers were hurting its results, and in February it lowered earnings guidance for the most recent fiscal year for the third time.

At the time, Pier 1 announced the retirement of Chief Financial Officer Charles Turner. Laura Coffey, senior vice president of planning, took over the responsibilities of finance chief on an interim basis.

On Wednesday, Pier 1 increased its quarterly dividend to seven cents a share from six cents.

The company also said it plans to close about 100 stores over the next three years, resulting in a store count of just below 1,000.

In after-hours trading, Pier 1 shares climbed 3.8% to $13.13.

“Although fiscal 2015 ending inventories are higher than originally planned, their complexion is healthy and not believed to pose a substantial markdown risk," the company said.

Pier 1 said priorities for the new year include expense controls, reducing capital expenditures and lowering store costs, moves expected to “help drive Ebitda dollar growth in fiscal year 2016, and have a more pronounced effect in fiscal year 2017."

Pier 1 expects first-quarter earnings of seven cents to eight cents a share, while analysts polled by Thomson Reuters project 12 cents. For the full year, it projects 83 cents to 87 cents a share, compared with analysts' average estimate of 90 cents.

Comparable-sales growth in the quarter rose 5.7%. This resulted in a full-year total of 4.7%, compared with a February forecast of 5%.

Pier 1 expects comparable-sales growth of about 4% in the current quarter and mid-single-digit growth this year.

For the quarter ended Feb. 28, Pier One reported a profit of $33.1 million, or 37 cents a share, down from $42.6 million, or 41 cents a share, a year earlier. Earnings excluding items were 39 cents a share. Net sales rose 5% to $543.6 million.

Write to Josh Beckerman at josh.beckerman@wsj.com
