BOJ's inflation target remains elusive with flat February data

Financial markets expect further monetary easing to stimulate spending and price rises

Tokyo

BANK of Japan governor Haruhiko Kuroda's 2 per cent annual inflation target for the Japanese economy appeared to be far off on Friday when it was revealed that the core annual rate of price increase had fallen to zero in February.

The central bank's options for remedying the situation are diminishing rapidly, analysts said.

The so-called headline core consumer price index (CPI), which includes oil but excludes volatile fresh food prices, rose by 2.0 per cent last month compared to the level in February 2014 - slightly below median market forecasts and declining for a seventh consecutive month.

But after excluding the effects of a hike last April in Japan's national consumption tax, the rate of inflation in February was zero. By April, the tax hike will cease to impact the inflation rate and the rate of price rises from then is almost certain to be far short of the 2 per cent target, at least until later this year, analysts predict.

Mr Kuroda and other BOJ senior officials have repeatedly insisted in recent months that the roughly two-year timeframe that the central bank set it sights upon in April 2013 was not a precise target, and that they will be satisfied if the 2 per cent inflation rate is achieved sometime in fiscal 2015 which ends in March next year.

Recently appointed Bank of Japan policy board member Yutaka Harada said this week that it is "impossible" to consider the central bank's 2 per cent inflation target and the two-year timeframe for achieving it as "rigid" goals.

But the BOJ is now faced with a double dilemma, some economists say. If Japanese consumers and businessmen begin to lose faith in the central bank's ability to hit targets, a deflationary psychology may take hold again and both consumer spending and private capital investment could fall, leading to further price falls.

Financial markets, meanwhile, continue to expect the BOJ to introduce further monetary easing as a means to stimulate spending and price rises. But this is liable to exacerbate the already sharp depreciation of the yen, and government officials have indicated recently that this would be unwelcome.

Rising import prices caused by the weaker yen are hitting consumers and also smaller Japanese firms (who do not benefit from more competitive export prices) in the pocket. With nationwide local elections coming up, the government cannot risk antagonising voters with a weaker yen, analysts say.

Prices may continue to decline in the immediate future, they add, given relatively weak consumer demand and capital investment trends.

"Core consumer prices may fall as much as 0.5 per cent though they will hit bottom around July and rise toward the end of this year," Reuters quoted chief economist Junk Nishioka at Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corp as saying.

There are some glimmers of hope, however. With the current annual round of spring wage increases currently being negotiated in Japan, there are indications that base-pay rises are improving again after many years of stagnant wage trends.

Data on Friday showed that the availability of jobs in Japan rose in February to the highest in more than 20 years and the jobless rate edged down. This could help put upward pressure on wage levels, economists say.

This is expected to feed into increased personal consumption, and inflation, although the positive impact could be limited if deflation fears begin to set in again, some fear.

Japan suffered from deflation for almost two decades until Mr Kuroda launched successive rounds of aggressive monetary easing after April 2013.

Further official data released on Friday showed that Japanese household spending fell by 2.9 per cent in February from a year earlier in price-adjusted real terms. This compared with the median estimate of a 3.2 per cent decline in a Reuters poll of economists.
