The Short View

Little by little, the eurozone pulls back from the brink. Eurozone shares have rallied strongly this year on signs that continental Europe has averted a deflationary slump. Yesterday brought fresh evidence to support that case.

Eurozone economic sentiment rose in March to a near-four-year high, according to the European Commission . German inflation was also back in positive territory , and today's eurozone-wide data could also show annual inflation edging back up to zero. Especially comforting for the European Central Bank - which this month launched eurozone "quantitative easing" to combat that deflation threat - were signs of European companies starting to regain pricing power.

Manufacturers' expectations about future selling prices threatened to go into free-fall last year. The commission survey showed that more businesses in Germany are expecting to increase prices rather than lower them, while Spanish manufacturers were noticeably less gloomy - especially compared with French rivals.

The improvement suggests that underlying inflation trends are creeping back towards something more normal, especially as the survey also showed consumer price expectations rising.

In turn, that suggests the effects of a weaker euro are feeding through into higher prices - just as the ECB wanted.

But the improvement in inflation expectations is only modest and from a very weak base. Long-term eurozone inflation priced into financial markets remains significantly below the ECB's target of an annual rate "below but close" to 2 per cent.

The improvement in eurozone economic optimism should also be put into context - especially compared with the rally in eurozone share prices. Sentiment is still significantly weaker than in the lull before the eurozone debt crisis took its toll starting in early 2010. And there remains the risk of Greece recreating similar crisis conditions. In contrast, the Euro Stoxx 600 has powered ahead - rising 17 per cent so far this year.

It is questionable just how much price inflation QE creates in real economies - but not in share markets.

ralph.atkins@ft.com
