Uncertain times ahead for UK consumers

The postwar era has been staggeringly inflationary compared to the more distant past. When I was in my early teens in the 1970s, my mother kept a cupboard stuffed with goods such as coffee and sugar. She bought them when there was an offer, or she had the money to hand, because inflation was running well into double digits, and ahead of the growth in wages in most families, including ours. Stockpiling dry goods was a small defence of our standard of living.

Now westerners confront a different worry: prices might start going down. In some parts of the eurozone they have been falling for some time. Last month recorded price increases in Britain also fell to zero.

Economists think a little inflation is a good thing because it lubricates changes in the prices of some goods and services relative to others, hence an inflation target of 2 per cent. But high inflation is socially and economically corrosive, redistributing purchasing power away from small savers and those on low wages that do not keep up, and also degrading trust in long-term bargains.

Would a period of falling prices matter? In Britain, prices were as likely to fall as to rise between the dawn of the industrial revolution and 1914. They spiked during the first world war and immediately afterwards, then fell again until the 1940s.

All that is true, anyway, according to the retail price index. On that measure, however, prices are still rising now (though they were falling for a few months as recently as 2009). It is a different measure, the consumer price index, that now puts inflation at zero.

The insight that there could be a generalised rise in prices, without any improvement in real prosperity, dates back to John Locke (1632-1704) and David Hume (1711-1776). But measuring the rate of increase is not simple. Stanley Jevons (1835-1882), who introduced mathematical methods into economics, made the first attempt, prompted by the 1849 Gold Rush and its effect on the price of gold.

It was not long before economists started worrying about the technicalities. Are we measuring price changes forward from a base in the past, or backward from today's prices? Which goods and services should we include?

Sometimes, as now, particularly volatile commodities such as energy explain a lot of the movement; it can make sense to look at a "core" rate excluding these. New products are invented, and old ones go out of fashion. Nobody in 1948 was buying smartphones, and we are not buying mangles. Each February the Office for National Statistics decides which goods to include in the index. This year frozen pizza was thrown out and liver put back in for the first time since 1999.

Over long periods, the fact that the make-up of the economy changes so much prevents meaningful comparison. Statisticians adjust prices for big improvements in the quality of some goods. These are called "hedonic" indices and involve factoring in specific characteristics, such as the faster speeds, bigger memory and sharper screens on a laptop bought today compared to one bought just a year or two ago. Hedonic adjustments have become far more extensive since the 1990s, due to the changes in consumer technologies.

At times of rapid innovation, prices are likely to fall in quality-adjusted terms and they might fall in straightforward pounds and pence terms, too. A wave of innovation that reduces many prices, which explains some of the periods of negative inflation in the 19th century, is welcome. This might be part of what is happening now.

But economists worry about a more ominous explanation: a sustained general decline in the price level.

This would matter if it turned into a downward spiral in the economy because people kept postponing consumption in the expectation of lower prices in future - the opposite of my mother's stockpiling in the 1970s. This at present seems unlikely. The UK's current zero CPI inflation is largely due to the falling price of energy, and the economy is still growing.

A more serious reason for concern is the effect deflation would have on real debt burdens. Like Japan after 1991, the European economies have a debt overhang, inhibiting a return to growth. A quick and politically painless way to reduce debt burdens, private and public, is a bout of high inflation.

This would arbitrarily redistribute resources from savers to borrowers, but it would clear the decks for the economy to grow again. If we face sustained low or negative inflation, by contrast, the prospect of lost decades looms large.

The writer is a professor of economics at the University of Manchester and author of 'GDP: A brief but affectionate history'
