The Short View

Movie buffs call it a "MacGuffin" - a device that serves no other purpose than to provide characters with a motive, often while the real story plays out elsewhere. Think of the briefcase in Pulp Fiction ; "Rosebud" in Citizen Kane .

Is the Bank of Japan offering up something similar with its 2 per cent inflation target? Market participants are beginning to wonder. The policy board has spent the past year or so emphasising its commitment to reaching that threshold, even as a tax rise and a collapse in oil prices has dragged down the core consumer price index (which includes energy). Data due tomorrow could show zero per cent consumer price inflation for February.

Governor Haruhiko Kuroda and co have bent logic to keep the official inflation-chasing narrative on track - first arguing that lower oil was a threat to rising prices, then saying it should, in time, push up prices by boosting demand. The roughly two-year timeframe for the big "quantitative and qualitative easing" programme, which began in April 2013, has been quietly dropped along the way.

Meanwhile, the only undeniable effect of all that QQE is a steady accumulation of government debt at the central bank, which is now the single biggest holder with 23 per cent of the total outstanding.

Until last October the BoJ was buying Y50tn ($419bn) of government bonds a year; now it is buying Y80tn, more than double the new issuance from the finance ministry over the fiscal year beginning next week.

All that buying pressure has driven bond prices so high (and rates so low) that the government expects to spend Y10.1tn on interest payments in the 2015 fiscal year. That is less than it spent in 1986, when the gross debt stock was less than one-fifth of today's levels.

BoJ officials still blanch at the charge that they are simply monetising the debt.

But as QQE extends into its third year, what began as a radical measure to yank Japan out of deflation now seems to have become the ordinary course of business.

It seems not so much to do with pushing up inflation, as with keeping the world's biggest government debt burden well out of harm's way.

ben.mclannahan@ft.com
