Bank of England Keeps Interest Rate Unchanged; Decision follows news that annual inflation slowed to zero in February

LONDON—The Bank of England left its main interest rate unchanged Thursday following a further slowdown in inflation in the U.K., where campaigning in national elections has entered its final month.

The BOE said in a statement that its rate-setting Monetary Policy Committee opted to keep the central bank's benchmark rate at 0.5% following its April meeting. Officials also agreed to leave the size of the BOE's bond portfolio unchanged at £375 billion ($558 billion).

Annual inflation in the U.K. slowed to zero in February, the slowest rate of price-growth recorded in more than 50 years. The slowdown comes despite strong growth and falling unemployment in Europe's third-largest economy, and reflects a sharp fall in prices for oil and food that is pulling down inflation rates across the globe.

BOE Governor Mark Carney and most other senior officials have signaled they believe the current bout of low inflation in the U.K. will pass and that their next move will be to raise interest rates, after more than six years of emergency-level borrowing costs.

Yet one official, Chief Economist Andrew Haldane, has broken ranks to warn the central bank may have to cut interest rates further if feeble price growth proves persistent.

Investors currently expect the BOE will finally lift its benchmark rate from its record-low level in mid-2016, according to interest-rate derivatives that track the BOE's main rate. The Federal Reserve is expected to raise short-term interest rates in the U.S. later this year.

Britain's economy grew 2.6% in 2014, making it the fastest-growing of the Group of Seven advanced industrialized nations last year.

The country's economic performance is a central theme of this year's election May 7.

Prime Minister David Cameron is hoping voters will give him the credit for the recovery and return him to office. The main opposition Labour Party argues that living standards have fallen under Mr. Cameron's watch. Polls put the two parties neck-and-neck, making the outcome of this year's vote hard to call.

Write to Jason Douglas at jason.douglas@wsj.com
