Mailbag; “If the Fed’s theories were valid, shouldn’t we be experiencing unprecedented prosperity and high inflation?” Bill Terrell, Saegertown, Pa.

No Improvements Needed

To the Editor:

I would like to support the March 23 Economic Beat column (“The Ugly Side of the Fed's Reluctance to Raise Rates"). The Fed is supposed to be a nonpartisan and nonpolitical construct that has been given a specific mission, but it is very political. The members' reluctance to raise interest rates serves a great political purpose. By keeping rates artificially low, the Federal debt looks better than it is (though it's horrible under any guise), and doesn't grow at the quicker rate it would if proper interest rates were applied to it.

The idea that government policies can improve on the laws of supply and demand is just plain wrong, and is based on the same hubris that politicians exercise when they think they can legislate to micromanage everything. It has been claimed that Fed policies prolonged the Great Depression, and it is doing the same to the current economy.

Louis Levy

San Antonio

To the Editor:

To the points raised in the column, we should add the effect on asset prices. Long-term asset prices of course vary inversely with yield, and this is a two-way street: Whatever portion of asset-price appreciation is due to yield suppression is given back when yields return to normal. Just in the past 20 years, we've been treated to two major such boom-and-bust episodes, with economic damage reaching far beyond asset prices. Whatever gains are realized from low-rate policy—and Gene Epstein showed that they are increasingly dubious—are merely borrowed from the future.

Beyond the short term, the Fed's theories about its policies, inflation, and economic growth are untenable. The Fed has been cutting rates for over 30 years. It has nailed them to zero for six years and done more than $4 trillion of quantitative easing. Where has that gotten us? If the Fed's theories were valid, shouldn't we be experiencing unprecedented prosperity and high inflation by now? Before the Fed can get the right answers, it has to start asking the right questions.

Bill Terrell

Saegertown, Pa.

Wrong Rewards

To the Editor:

We have a Federal Reserve committed to zero-rate overnight lending to stimulate the economy (“Empty Threat of Impatient Policy," Editorial Commentary, March 23). Simultaneously, we have initiated repressive bank controls that have essentially frozen the very institutions necessary to lead us out of the financial freeze. Couple that with government sequestration and an Affordable Care Act that essentially motivates industry to hire part-time, and you isolate the Fed's ability to function.

The unexpected consequence of what has happened here is not a result of the Fed wrongly reducing interest rates. Rather, it was a sequence of events that rewarded banks to buy Treasury bills, instead of a basket of short-term lines of credit to small business, and rewarded industry to buy back shares and pay dividends, rather than construct new plants and factories.

The Fed now finds itself facing tepid growth, a strengthening dollar that threatens exports, and a collapsing oil market that will stall that segment of domestic economic growth. Rate increases now will exacerbate all these conditions.

Lee Hoffman

Holmdel, N.J.
