Japan on brink of deflation as spending stays flat

Abenomics flounders as figures mark first month of zero growth since 2013

TOKYO - Japanese inflation stalled last month with a key measure of prices flat for the first time in nearly two years, data showed yesterday, weighed by a plunge in oil rates and tepid consumer spending.

The dismal figures come after Bank of Japan (BOJ) chief Haruhiko Kuroda acknowledged this month that dragging the country out of years of deflation was proving to be "very challenging", and he warned that inflation may temporarily fall to zero.

While core inflation, excluding volatile fresh food prices, increased 2 per cent in February, a measure that strips out the impact of a sales tax rise last year - which is the BOJ's benchmark - came in flat from a year ago.

The reading was far short of the bank's goal of sustained 2 per cent inflation and marks the first month of zero growth since May 2013, just after Tokyo launched a high-profile bid to kickstart the economy and conquer deflation.

Inflation is a key measure of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's plan to end years of stagnant or falling prices that have been blamed for holding back growth in the world's No. 3 economy.

Prices had been on the rise after the programme was launched, largely due to Japan's heavy post-Fukushima energy bills as it turned to pricey fossil fuel alternatives following the atomic accident.

The so-called Abenomics growth blitz - including big government spending and massive central bank monetary easing - helped pull down the yen, which in turn pushed up import costs.

But oil prices have tumbled since the summer and consumers snapped their wallets shut after the government raised sales taxes to 8 per cent from 5 per cent in April last year to help pay down Japan's enormous national debt.

Doubts are growing over what many see as an overly ambitious inflation target.

Minutes from the central bank's January meeting showed that three of nine BOJ board members doubted the chances of reaching the price target.

Separate data yesterday showed spending among Japanese households dropped for the 11th month in a row, although the 2.9 per cent decline last month from a year earlier was smaller than the 5.1 per cent fall in January.

The unemployment rate edged down to 3.5 per cent in February from 3.6 per cent a month earlier.

Following annual labour talks, many companies have responded to Mr Abe's call to boost wages, which he sees as crucial to putting more money in workers' pockets and driving up spending.

But a majority of economists surveyed by Bloomberg News this month expect another round of easing by October, even as the economy crept out of a brief recession in the last quarter of 2014.

"The plunge in oil will keep capping gains in consumer prices," said Mr Takeshi Minami, an economist at Norinchukin Research Institute.

SMBC Nikko Securities said that the central bank would have little choice but to "carry on with the (easing) policy until the actual inflation rate rises".

AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE
