UK inflation hits zero and prices could keep falling

INFLATION dropped to zero last month, as falling oil prices and supermarket discounts pushed Britain closer to its first period of deflation on record.

The pound fell by almost a cent against the euro and dollar, to €1.3566 and $1.4852, after data from the Office for National Statistics showed inflation, as measured by the consumer prices index (CPI) stood at zero in February compared with a year ago, from 0.3pc in January.

This is the lowest rate since comparable records began in 1989, and the weakest price growth since 1960, according to experimental ONS data. Economists expected inflation to fall to 0.1pc in February. The ONS put the decline down tos lower food prices, including bread, milk, vegetables and meat. Morrisons slashed prices on more than 100 items last month by 22pc as it fought for market share with Lidl and Aldi.

Prices for a range of "recreational goods and services" including games, gardening tools and books, also fell, while cheaper petrol also pushed inflation lower. "There were no large upward effects to offset the change," the ONS said.

George Osborne, the Chancellor, said it was a "remarkable moment" that was "very welcome news" for households. Wages began growing faster than prices last October, and low inflation should mean people have more money in their pockets.

Most economists expect a period of deflation in the first half of this year, with interest rates unlikely to rise until 2016. Michael Saunders, chief UK economist at Citi, noted that excluding tax changes, prices fell by 0.1pc on an annual basis.

"We think this would represent a good form of deflation in which lower global food and energy prices provide a much needed boost to household real income levels," said John Hawksworth, chief economist at PwC.

While CPI inflation is currently well below the Bank of England's 2pc target, Mark Carney, the Governor, has said it would be "extremelyfoolish" to "lean against" the current period of low inflation by cutting rates.

Core inflation, which strips out volatile components such as food and energy costs, was 1.2pc in February, while the retail prices index (RPI) measure, still used in pay deals, stood at 1pc.

Housing market worries: B4
