Zero inflation's here — but no need for soul-searching

WE learned yesterday that headline inflation fell to zero in February — estimated to be the lowest in the UK since 1960 and well below the Bank of England's target of 2% in the medium term. There is a very good chance inflation will fall again next month to be negative.

Some people will list reasons why we should "fear" low inflation. Companies can more easily justify lower wage increases. Deflation (negative inflation) could cause consumers and companies to delay purchases if items are cheaper in the future. Uncertainty about future inflation could cause companies to delay investment. Low inflation can make it more difficult to repay outstanding debt and may be a sign of underlying economic weakness.

These are all valid reasons to "fear" low inflation — but only if low inflation is expected to persist and if the central bank is unable to respond. This is not today's situation in the UK.

Low inflation is unlikely to persist because the recent sharp fall in the price index is driven primarily by the sharp fall in energy and food prices. In fact, Bank calculations suggest that around three-quarters of inflation's deviation from our 2% target can be explained simply by recent price falls in these sectors.

What's important to realise is that even if energy and food prices stay at current low levels, this does not mean inflation will also stay low.

Inflation is calculated as the change in the prices for a basket of goods relative to one year ago. If energy and food prices are at their current levels one year from today, they will contribute 0% to the aggregate inflation calculation. Today they are subtracting 1.1 percentage points. This large negative contribution obscures price increases in other sectors. For example, service prices have increased 2.4% over the past year but inflation in this important part of the economy is overshadowed by the price declines in food and energy.

This is not to say that inflation will automatically bounce back to 2% when food and energy prices stop falling. Lower energy prices allow companies to reduce the price of the goods they sell — especially in industries that use energy intensively — leading to "second round" effects. Sterling's recent appreciation is likely to cause import prices to fall further. There is a powerful trend of global disinflation which may restrain prices globally.

These influences could build on lower food and energy prices to further drag on inflation. All merit close attention. But they are not causing a downward spiral in prices. Service inflation has basically been steady since last February. Core inflation — excluding direct effects from energy and food — is at the same level as November. Domestically focused inflation measures have been fairly stable over the past 18 months.

Moreover, these factors weighing down on inflation are likely to be increasingly counteracted by other forces. Wages have begun to pick up — and although January's gains were lower than expected — most indicators suggest that the labour market is improving quickly. A tighter labour market should support faster pay increases and feed through into higher prices — especially when combined with recent low productivity growth. The Euro Area is also showing signs of improvement, which should support demand for UK exports and prices.

All of these forces should ensure that inflation stops falling soon, low inflation is only temporary, and inflation rebounds fairly quickly in early 2016. If inflation unexpectedly remains low, however, the Bank has the tools to respond. Bank Rate could be reduced below its current level of 0.5%. Additional asset purchases could provide additional stimulus. Although these policies should not be needed, they would raise domestic inflation and probably further raise import prices by weakening sterling.

THEREFORE the question of whether "to fear or not to fear" low inflation should require far less soul-searching than Hamlet's "to be or not be". The current period of low inflation is most likely to be temporary, and will not therefore generate the negative consequences of persistently low inflation which would merit concern.

This temporary period of low inflation does not change my expectation that monetary policy will need to be tightened as the recovery continues and labour market tightens. And if this benign scenario does not play out, the Bank can respond with tools that were unavailable in Shakespeare's time and not even readily available a few years ago.

Kristin Forbes is a member of the Bank of England monetary policy committee

'Factors weighing down on inflation are likely to be increasingly counteracted by other forces'
