UK factories growing at fastest rate in months

BRITAIN'S factories expanded at their fastest rate in eight months during March, driven by a rise in new business and weak inflation.

The closely watched purchasing managers' index came in at 54.4 last month, higher than analysts' expectations of 54.3.

Any reading above 50 indicates expansion, and it means British manufacturing has been growing every month for two years.

The growth was powered by the biggest rise in new business since July last year, with the consumer goods industry leading the way, according to the survey compiled by Markit.

British exporters also reported a rise in orders from across the world including the United States, China, Germany and the Middle East.

"The sector is on course for output growth ranging around 0.6pc over the opening quarter as a whole, a positive contribution to broader economic expansion and its best performance since the first half of last year," said Rob Dobson, senior economist at Markit.

Inflation, which fell to zero last month, also buoyed manufacturers by lowering purchase prices, while the average rate of job creation in manufacturing has now reached 5,000 a month.

Figures released by the Office for National Statistics on Monday con-firmed that the UK's services sector continued to power the recovery at the end of last year. But there was an encouraging rise in exports of 5.9pc in the final quarter, helping to reduce the UK's trade deficit.

"It was the consumer goods sector that was the star of the show, indicating that confidence among consumers is swelling and leading to optimism for the months ahead that activity will be maintained," said David Noble, chief executive at the Chartered Institute of Procurement & Supply.

But separate statistics from the ONS pointed to continuing weakness in workers' output, with productivity falling 0.2pc in the last three months of the year. "The absence of productivity growth in the seven years since 2007 is unprecedented in the postwar period," said the ONS.

Output per hour in manufacturing fell by 1.3pc, implying wage costs in the sector fell by 0.4pc.

"With limited growth in our main export market, the eurozone, we must be thankful that for the time being the domestic market remains the main driver of growth for the UK economy," said Mike Rigby, head of manufacturing at Barclays. Further expansion in factory output is likely to be contingent on low oil prices and a muted pound, said Howard Archer, of IHS Global.

"UK manufacturers will be hoping that input prices remain muted and this facilitates them pricing competitively to win business. Also that the pound comes significantly off its recent highs against the euro," said Mr Archer. Sterling hit a seven-year high against the euro last month, at 70.14p. But the euro had bounced back to trade at 72.63p yesterday. Sterling was at a five-year low against the dollar.

"The manufacturing sector's recovery is picking up pace," said Vicky Redwood, chief UK economist at Capital Economics. "Encouragingly, the new export orders balance rose to its highest level in seven months, suggesting that the recent rise in the pound is not acting as too big a constraint for now."

'Absence of productivity growth in seven years is unprecedented in the post-war period'
