Weaker euro helps ease eurozone deflation in March

Deflation in the eurozone showed signs of slowing in March following the launch of the European Central Bank 's €1.1tn asset buying programme to stave off prolonged low inflation.

Prices fell for the fourth consecutive month, but less steeply than in previous months, as a weaker euro helped ease deflation across the eurozone. The euro has dropped by almost a fifth against the dollar over the past year, thanks in part to the ECB's quantitative easing programme.

Inflation stood at minus 0.1 per cent year-on-year in March, according to Eurostat . This drop in prices compared to a 0.3 per cent fall in February and 0.6 per cent dip in January.

But core inflation - which strips out the cost of food and energy - slowed to 0.6 per cent in March from 0.7 per cent in February, leading economists to argue that a continued period of deflation was still possible even with QE.

"The latest data on eurozone inflation and unemployment do little to diminish the danger of a prolonged period of deflation in the currency union," said Jonathan Loynes, chief European economist at Capital Economics.

The biggest cause of the fall in prices - which was in line with forecasts - was energy, where prices tumbled 5.8 per cent. This was significantly lower than the 7.9 per cent fall recorded by the category in February.

There was better news in the eurozone's unemployment figures, which fell to a near three-year low in the latest sign of economic improvement in the bloc.

The jobless rate fell to 11.3 per cent in February from 11.4 per cent the previous month - a figure revised up from 11.2 per cent.

Across all 28 EU member states the unemployment rate was 9.8 per cent in February, down from 10.5 per cent the year before.

The improved figures come a week after a closely watched poll of purchasing managers implied that eurozone economic activity was increasing at its quickest pace in four years.

"The economic tailwinds of cheap oil, a weaker euro and aggressive ECB easing will boost growth this year," said Christian Schulz, senior economist at Berenberg. "It would be premature to even consider scaling back the stimulus before September 2016."

Mario Draghi, ECB president, has attributed much of the bloc's improved growth to the weaker euro.
