Low inflation feeds the biggest shopping boom since financial crash of 2008

FAMILIES are spending the savings from lower petrol and food prices on electrical kitchen appliances, furniture and new computers in the biggest shopping boom since the 2008 crash.

Shoppers are also being encouraged to spend more as a result of price wars among retailers.

Figures from the Office for National Statistics showed that average prices for retail goods across the board were 3.7 per cent lower in February than the same time last year, representing the largest annual fall since records began in 1997.

As the cost of living crisis improves, the number of items bought on high streets and through online retailers such as Amazon was 6 per cent higher in February than a year ago. The quantity of goods bought in shops and online was rising more rapidly than at any time since May 2008, the ONS said.

In particular, families were purchasing more electrical appliances for their homes, such as juicers and coffee makers, with the ONS data showing sales had risen almost 17 per cent in a year.

Other popular purchases included furniture - sales were up 12 per cent - as well as laptops and mobile phones, sales of which were up 14 per cent.

The return of above-inflation pay rises for many workers also allowed shoppers to spend more money overall. In total, £6.6billion a week was spent in shops and online in February - a rise of £100million in a year.

Clive Black, of retail analysts Shore Capital, said: "The pendulum has certainly swung away from the extreme austerity we saw after the financial crisis.

"People have more money in their pockets than in recent years, with low oil prices pushing inflation to record lows, and that cash is now being spent on the sorts of things people want, rather than what they need."

He said alongside sprucing up their homes and investing in the latest gadgets, families were more happy to spend on days out and holidays - particularly with the pound stretching further in Europe this year.

This week, official figures showed the rate of inflation had dropped to 0 per cent for the first time on record.

Phil Dorrell, the director of the retail consultants, Retail Remedy, said the news had cemented an "unstoppable momentum" as families gained confidence to spend after the shock of the recession.
