World News: New Japan Data Points to Slump

TOKYO -- The core gauge of Japanese consumer prices was flat from a year earlier in February, deepening worries Japan is heading toward deflation two years after its central bank launched a radical economic-revival program.

The government said Friday the core consumer-price index hit 0%, the lowest level since May 2013 and far from the 2% target that the central bank had pledged to hit by this spring. The index excludes fresh food prices and effects of a tax increase.

The price data underscores the ongoing difficulties Prime Minister Shinzo Abe faces in pulling the world's third-largest economy out of its long slump. Bank of Japan Gov. Haruhiko Kuroda insists he is still on track, albeit on a delayed timetable, to reach his price goal.

But he has had much more trouble gathering traction than many economists had hoped for at the outset of his campaign in April 2013. The main reason for price weakness is a drop in global oil prices, something beyond the central bank's control.

Surveys show most BOJ watchers expect Mr. Kuroda to expand his stimulus program this year to push ahead with his fight against deflation. "The BOJ should consider undertaking additional easing in as early as April, or its credibility as a deflation fighter could suffer," said Goshi Kataoka, chief economist at Mitsubishi UFJ Research and Consulting.

Still, Mr. Kuroda faces growing challenges in continuing his quest, as business executives, economists, politicians -- even some of his own policy board members--have turned increasingly wary of the side effects from his record-shattering asset-purchases.

"The experiment is over," declared Miyako Suda, who served as a policy board member until 2011, as she expressed opposition to further easing by the BOJ.

To be sure, despite struggling to meet its inflation target, the BOJ can boast success on other fronts. It has been effective in steering financial markets, pushing down Japanese interest rates and weakening the yen, while fueling stocks to a 15-year high.

Big companies like Toyota Motor Corp. have reported record profits, prompting them to hand out the largest pay increases for their workers in years this spring. Such moves, if sustained, could fuel the virtuous cycle recovery that Mr. Kuroda has been seeking.

"The BOJ's easing has been exerting its intended effects and it seems safe to say that the measure works both in theory and practice," Mr. Kuroda said at a news conference on March 20.

But the impact to date on the real economy has been muted. In the seven quarters since Mr. Kuroda first fired what he calls his "bazooka," Japan's gross domestic product has grown at a sluggish average annual pace of about 0.2%.

Pinched by higher import costs -- the result of the BOJ's yen-weakening -- as well a sales tax increase, Japanese consumers have been hesitant to spend. Corporate surveys show business managers, especially at smaller firms, are also cautious about capital expenditures.

Some of that has been the result of developments outside the central bank's control. The sales tax increase enacted last April to curb Japan's government debt doused much of the gains from the BOJ's stimulus. A plunge in oil prices has dragged down inflation and is seen as having just a temporary impact on prices.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service
