Zero significance in the UK inflation milestone; So long as the BoE keeps demand on an upward path, it is doing fine

For centuries mathematicians could not settle on how to treat the number zero. Economists display no such diffidence; if anything, this roundest of numbers holds too much sway over the field, particularly when a rational discussion of the significance of deflation is called for.

Few were shocked when Britain recorded zero inflation for the first time since the 1950s. This moment has been anticipated for a while. Had February's index not gained the honour, March or April would have won it.

More to the point, none of the reasons that zero matters currently apply. Low or negative inflation can matter if it reinforces low wages, but there is little sign of this phenomenon. Pay has picked up despite inflation heading steadily lower for more than two years. Wage-price spirals of either direction have been consigned to the past.

Falling prices can also encourage shoppers to hoard rather than spend cash. On closer examination this fear dissipates too. Consumers buy individual items, not a basket of them all, and in ordinary times are not particularly forward-thinking. Clothes became relentlessly cheaper in the decade to 2008 without causing any measurable postponement in decisions to buy jeans or T-shirts. Recent figures suggest the British shopper is in buoyant form.

Some central bankers worry that deflation neuters their monetary weapon of choice against weak demand, a cut in interest rates. There are practical limits to how far policy rates can fall and, at zero, negative inflation means that real rates are positive. Falling prices also cause the real burden of debt to rise over time, a particular concern after the borrowing-binge the UK recently experienced.

Yet neither of these should be worrying the Bank of England . There is no special causal significance in a particular inflation printout. A change in a price index is uninformative, without knowing what brought it about. When it is weak macroeconomic demand there are reasons to worry. Otherwise, there are none. Rising demand renders debts more serviceable, consumption more attractive, and higher wages affordable. Data from retail sales, tax revenues and nominal GDP all indicate that UK demand is doing just fine. British workers have even recovered the pluck to ditch their jobs to seek a better one.

Britain's monetary thought leaders have used the arrival of deflation as an excuse for a public argument about the next move in interest rates. Mark Carney , governor of the BoE, spoke of the foolishness of cutting rates, which inspired Andrew Haldane, his chief economist, to muse about that very possibility, a viewpoint later squashed by his colleague David Miles.

These squabbles display a perverse ability to complicate what should be a simple matter. The real culprit, however, is the inflation target, which obliges the BoE to target something it only partially controls. Monetary policy more directly affects nominal spending, only bringing about a certain level of inflation after interacting with the supply side. On this measure, Mr Carney has performed admirably, keeping demand growing somewhat faster than before his arrival in 2012, albeit slower than what was normal before the crisis. Fluctuations in headline inflation stem from matters beyond his control, such as the recent sharp fall in the international oil price.

In other words, the UK economy is doing well and the BoE is doing a good job. Neither tighter nor looser policy is warranted. Its greatest challenge is communication. Fewer ruminative speeches on the significance of deflation would help.
