Japan nears deflation as core CPI hits 0%

Collapsing oil prices and subdued demand have again thrown Japan to the brink of deflation, despite the world's biggest monetary stimulus programme.

Japanese core consumer price inflation, which includes energy but excludes food, fell to a year-on-year reading of zero in February. That follows a figure of 0.2 per cent in January.

Japan's central bank, on a mission to banish entrenched deflation, has been buying assets for the past two years, promising to double the country's monetary base. It moved up a gear last October with a "double bazooka" that accelerated purchases to Y80tn a year.

Haruhiko Kuroda, Bank of Japan governor, this month acknowledged that his original promise to hit 2 per cent inflation within two years from April 2013 had come unstuck.

While that brought the BoJ's public comments in line with common wisdom - and is partially a reflection of the global slump in oil prices - it emphasises the gap between target and actuality.

Weak demand at home also weighed. Household consumption declined for an 11th straight month in February, down 2.9 per cent.

Consumption has been weak since last April, when Japan raised its consumption tax by 3 percentage points to 8 per cent. The core inflation figure also strips out distortion from that tax rise.

Japanese markets shrugged of the news, underscoring the difficulties policy makers face as they attempt to revive the world's third-largest economy.

The Nikkei 225 fell 0.1 per cent in Tokyo, a subdued start but in line with risk-off mood around global markets. The Japanese yen was flat, at 119.2 per dollar.

Stocks have nevertheless been hitting 15-year highs this month, in part because analysts see the BoJ offering more stimulus to stamp out "the deflationary mindset".

The hope for structural reforms still has investors optimistic, however. Mr Abe has been trying to get corporations to lift wages and in January basic pay grew at its fastest pace for 15 years. This month companies such as Toyota, Nissan and Hitachi also agreed to the biggest pay increase in more than a decade.
