Next move in rates will be upwards, says Carney

BoE Governor and chief economist at odds over dangers of zero inflation

unlikely to force the Bank of England to cut rates below their already rock-bottom levels, its Governor has said, underscoring a fracturing of views between the top policymakers at Threadneedle Street.

Mark Carney said the next move in interest rates would be a rise, putting him at loggerheads with Andrew Haldane, his chief economist. "We're still in a position where our message is … that the next move in interest rates is going to be up," Mr Carney said during a panel discussion at a Bundesbank conference in Frankfurt. Mr Haldane surprised investors last week when he said a recent sharp slowdown in inflation meant the Bank was as likely as not to cut rates, a view previously rejected by Mr Carney.

Several other top policymakers at the BoE have left Mr Haldane looking isolated in recent days.

Yesterday, one of the Bank's deputy governors, Ben Broadbent, also played down the fall in inflation, which touched zero last month. He said Britain was unlikely to suffer a long period of deflation.

Arguments that consumers might delay purchases were reductive and even "misleading", he said, warning against "overstating the risks".

Inflation as measured by the Consumer Prices Index fell to zero in February, bringing the UK into its first period of "noflation" since comparable records began in 1989.

The current low inflation is driven largely by a collapse in the oil price, from a peak of $110 per barrel in June to below $60. But other factors, including a ferocious supermarket price war, have also contributed.

Mr Broadbent said this was likely to be temporary, with the halving in the oil price helping to boost real incomes. "While [low inflation] is unlikely to go on for that long, it is positive, not negative, for demand and output," he said.

"The fall in inflation has been driven not by the declining value of what we sell, including wages … but by a steep fall in the real price of something we buy."

There was already evidence that falling food and fuel prices had fed through to spending and household confidence. Real household consumption rose at its fastest pace for seven years in 2014, he said.

On the argument that deflation was a problem, he said: "Suppose you're told that prices will fall over the next year but that the value of your income will remain unchanged. All else equal, the prospect of falling prices will give you an incentive to … postpone a bit of consumption. At the same time, the real value of that income will prospectively have risen.

"On most estimates … the second effect will dominate the first and consumption should actually rise."

Other policymakers, including David Miles, Kristin Forbes and Minouche Shafik have made clear that they still expect rates to rise gradually over the next three years.

Two members of the monetary policy committee - Ian McCafferty and Martin Weale - are advocating a rate rise sooner rather than later, amid concerns that the recovery could create a sudden increase in inflationary pressures.

Þ The Federal Reserve is "seriously considering" raising America's nearzero interest rates this year even though this may slow the economy, Fed chair Janet Yellen said.
