BOJ Gets Higher Policy Grade Than Abe; Economists in Wall Street Journal survey praise effort to stoke inflation but say more is needed to revive growth

Bank of Japan Gov. Haruhiko Kuroda has done a good job of attempting to stoke inflation in Japan, but Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will have to try a little harder if he is going to get the world's third-largest economy humming again.

That is the rough result of a Wall Street Journal survey of 33 economists in the U.S. and Japan marking two years since Mr. Kuroda introduced his radical monetary-easing policy with the backing of Mr. Abe. The two are trying to reverse roughly 15 years of deflation in Japan, during which prices, wages and spending steadily fell.

Respondents were asked to complete an online survey between March 26 and April 1. Nearly three-quarters gave Mr. Kuroda an A or a B when asked to assign a letter grade to the central banker's attempts to achieve the bank's stated goal of 2% inflation. In contrast, 50% of participants gave Mr. Abe a C, and only one gave the prime minister an A.

Nathaniel Karp, chief U.S. economist of BBVA Research, said of the BOJ's policies: “Strong effort, but other structural measures are needed. However, these are outside the scope of BOJ."

Though economists gave the BOJ points for trying, more than half said that Japan still hadn't overcome deflation, and two-thirds forecast the Bank of Japan wouldn't hit its 2% inflation target. That puts Japan in a worse position than in April 2014, when the Journal conducted a similar survey. Then, only one-third of respondents said Japan hadn't yet put an end to deflation.

Inflation in Japan has fallen back in the past year partly because of a fall in oil prices that many economists say they didn't expect. Excluding the effects of a sales-tax increase, prices were flat in February, according to government figures.

The median forecast for Japan's core consumer-price index in the Journal's latest survey was 0.7% in March 2016 and 1.1% in March 2017. Of those surveyed, 60% said the Bank of Japan shouldn't exit from its easing program until inflation is achieved.

“As the U.S. experience has taught, don't be frozen by a specific date. Wait until the data tells a good story," said Sam Kahan and Jim Miel of ACT Research.

Nearly 40% said that the bank should implement additional easing measures between July and December this year, while 45% said no more easing was needed.

Respondents weren't so easy on Mr. Abe. “Intent to fight economic malaise is important, but very little was put on the table. Momentum is sadly lost," said Manish Sharma, professor at Doshisha Business School.

About half of respondents, or 52%, said the prime minister's long-term growth strategy, also known as the third arrow of his so-called Abenomics program to revive Japan's economy, was adequate or somewhat adequate. But 41% called it inadequate. The first two arrows are monetary and fiscal stimulus.

A majority of those canvassed said changes to the labor market were the most important piece of Mr. Abe's policy package. Labor issues are a “bottleneck for growth," said Takahiro Sekido, Japan strategist at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ. “Promoting productivity plus more reliance on foreign workers [is] needed," wrote Hiromichi Shirakawa, chief economist for Japan at Credit Suisse.

Economists said Mr. Abe's plan lacked details on coping with the nation's aging population and falling birthrate. Three economists said dealing with the demographic challenge was the most important policy move to spur Japan's economy, and four counted demographics as the biggest downside risk for Japan's economy over the next few years.

“What is missing in the third arrow is a policy to cope with a fall in population," including immigration policy, said J.P. Morgan Securities Chief Economist Masaaki Kanno. Under “the existing policy set, the declining trend of the population does not seem to be reversed, while the government assumes that the population will be stabilized at 100 million in 50 years." Japan currently has a population of about 127 million people.

Matthew DiCostanzo contributed to this article.
