Monetary stand kept,inflation forecast cut

THE BANGKO SENTRAL ng Pilipinas (BSP) yesterday left monetary policy untouched anew, as widely expected, in the face of manageable inflation and strong domestic economic activity.

But a lower-than-assumed hike in daily minimum wage in Metro Manila prompted the central bank to further cut its inflation forecast for this year.

In a press conference at the central bank headquarters in Manila, BSP Deputy Governor Diwa C. Guinigundo said the policy decision was based on the assessment that the rise in prices of widely used goods continues to be "manageable," with risks to the outlook remaining "broadly balanced."

"Latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation is likely to settle within the lower half of the target range of 2-4% for 2015 and 2016," Mr. Guinigundo said.

Inflation so far averaged 2.4% as of February after picking up to 2.5% that month from January's 2.4%.

Mr. Guinigundo explained that pending petitions for adjustments in utility rates, as well as possible higher electricity bills amid a looming power shortage, continue to pose upside risks to the inflation outlook, while prolonged uneven global economic growth mitigates upward pressures on commodity prices.

At the same time, "domestic demand conditions remain robust" on the back of solid private demand, adequate domestic liquidity, and buoyant business sentiment, he noted.

"Higher public spending is also expected to support economic activity," he added.

"Given these considerations, the Monetary Board is of the view that current monetary policy settings remain appropriate."

Overnight borrowing and lending rates were kept at 4.0% and 6.0%, respectively; special deposit account rates were also maintained at 2.50%, while banks' reserve requirement ratios were left unchanged as well.

Yesterday was the fourth straight meeting that the BSP kept its monetary policy steady, breaking ranks with many of its counterparts in the region that have slashed their borrowing costs since the year began to ward off deflationary pressures and prod growth.

Asked if there was growing pressure for BSP to follow suit, Mr. Guinigundo replied: "The major consideration [of Asian central banks] is precisely to stimulate economic growth."

"That is not the case in the Philippines because the economy continues to grow and domestic demand remains robust," he noted.

Mr. Guinigundo also recalled that when the BSP tightened monetary policy settings last year, those "preemptive moves [were taken] in anticipation of the developments in the US Fed plus the fact that, in 2014, there were pressures on prices."

Mr. Guinigundo said the "situation has not changed much" since there remains considerable uncertainty about the timing and magnitude of monetary policy normalization in the United States, which had kept its rates near zero since December 2008.

"So bringing down your policy rate is quite counterintuitive. We will not waste those preemptive moves for nothing."

NEW INFLATION FORECAST

At the same time, the central bank again cut its average inflation forecast for this year to 2.2% from 2.3% - the second time the estimate was reduced after a cut in February from 3.0% - even as it kept its estimate for 2016 at 2.5%.

Mr. Guinigundo said that the previous forecast for this year had assumed a P20 increase in daily minimum wage for Metro Manila.

"But based on the announcement of the wage board, the adjustment was limited to P15 per day. So that contributed to the lower forecast for 2015," he explained.

Mr. Guinigundo said that, in the months ahead, the central bank "will continue to monitor domestic and external developments affecting the inflation outlook to ensure that the monetary policy stance remains consistent with its price and financial stability objective." 
