Turkey’s March Inflation Rate Rises to Three-Month High; Soaring food prices and weakening currency scuttle hopes for interest-rate cuts

ISTANBUL—Turkey's annual inflation rate rose to a three-month high in March amid soaring food prices and a weakening currency, diminishing hopes for central bank interest-rate cuts to stoke sagging economic growth.

The consumer-price index rose to 7.61% in March from 7.55% in February, the state-statistics agency said Friday, despite government expectations of a slowdown and a forecast that it would drop to 7.3% in a survey conducted by The Wall Street Journal.

With last year's drought still weighing on food prices—which jumped 14% in March—and knock-on effects from the lira's 11% drop against the dollar since the start of the year, Turkey once again risks missing its 5% inflation target in 2015.

Mounting inflationary pressures are squeezing Turkey's central bank as it grapples with government pressure to boost growth in the $800 billion economy while also dealing with financial volatility as investors exit emerging markets in anticipation of U.S. Federal Reserve interest rate increases later this year.

“Inflation was envisaged to trend down uninterruptedly through the first four months of the year. Yet, both February and March realizations failed the expectations," said Gokce Celik, an economist at Finansbank AS in Istanbul. “The current inflation outlook is far from justifying the central bank of Turkey to resume interest rate cuts."

In a sign that market expectations of rate cuts were dimming, benchmark two-year bond yields rose to 8.82% after the inflation data, from an 8.7% close on Thursday. The lira extended losses to as much as 0.5% against the dollar.

Finance Minister Mehmet Simsek said Friday in an interview with the NTV news channel that the unwelcome trend of sticky inflation is driven by high food costs, but added that low oil prices may provide some reprieve going forward. Indeed, core inflation—which doesn't include highly taxed alcoholic beverages and tobacco, as well as food, drinks and gold—slowed by about 0.7 percentage points in March, despite the jump in headline price increases.

“The improvement in core inflation continues, this is important," Mr. Simsek said. Central-bankers could review interest-rate levels going forward if inflation expectations are well managed and policy credibility is strong, he added.

Turkey's central bank held interest rates steady in March, halting a two-month easing cycle after the lira slumped to record lows against the dollar. A meeting between President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and central bank Governor Erdem Basci also helped halt months of government attacks on policy makers for not reducing interest rates quickly enough to stimulate investments and growth—just ahead of a General Election in June.

The drop in core inflation may encourage Mr. Basci to resume his interest-rate cuts, some economists said. However, most analysts warned the central bank against moves that would erode faith in its push to slow inflation, and stoke more currency volatility with premature reductions to interest rates.

Inflation expectations have been deteriorating, too, with businessmen in the central bank's survey last month increasing their year-end forecast to 6.98% from 6.77%.

“Government officials kept quiet after the bank's decision to keep rates steady in March, which is a good sign. Let's see if they can maintain their silence," said currency strategists at Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. “Even if [the central bank] cuts rates modestly at its next policy meeting on April 22, we don't think markets will react well in light of the inflation data."

Write to Yeliz Candemir at yeliz.candemir@wsj.com
