Consumer price increase expected to have steadied in March

THE RISE in prices of widely used goods likely steadied in March, but could head north again this month with the onset of the dry season, according to analysts polled by BusinessWorld late last week.

February saw inflation slightly quicken to 2.5% after a five-month slide as transport and utility costs registered upward adjustments.

Last month could have seen a similar pace as prices of basic goods remained subdued, according to the 11 economists and bankers whom BusinessWorld surveyed.

The poll showed that inflation was likely unchanged at 2.5% in March - settling at the midpoint of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas' (BSP) 2.1-2.9% estimate for that month.

Official March inflation data is scheduled to be released by the Philippine Statistics Authority tomorrow.

Luis F. Dumlao, chairman of the Economics department at Ateneo de Manila University, and Mitzie Irene P. Conchada, economist at De La Salle University, both cited lower oil, electricity, and transport costs as factors that could have tempered inflation.

Other analysts, however, expect the increase in consumer prices to have picked up, with Institute for Development and Econometric Analysis, Inc. research director Remrick E. Patagan saying inflation likely accelerated to 2.9% - the fastest since November 2014's 2.7%, if realized. "Oil prices have recently consolidated, but in all likelihood the drop in prices has yet to run its course," Mr. Patagan said in an e-mail.

Victor A. Abola, economist at the University of Asia and the Pacific, expects inflation to have picked up to 2.6% last month. "Prices of some food items... go up during graduation time," he explained.

With the survey painting a picture of steady inflation, the year-to-date average likely settled at 2.5%, which is close to the low end of the central bank's 2-4% target range for 2015 though faster than its 2.2% forecast full- year average.

However, analysts said inflation could rise again this month with the onset of the dry season that usually sees a spike in electricity demand.

Australia and New Zealand Banking Corp. Ltd. economist Eugenia Fabon Victorino said power rates - which she noted "marginally eased" last month - are expected to "reverse in April and May."

"Thus, we see sequential price gains at 0.2% m/m," Ms. Victorino said in an e-mail.

IDEA's Mr. Patagan likewise said that the scheduled one-month maintenance shutdown of the Malampaya gas facility from March 15 to April 14 "will also exert upward pressure on the prices of household utilities."

Manila Electric Co. (Meralco) vice-president Larry S. Fernandez last month said that April and May bills may reflect P0.46 per kilowatt-hour (/kWh) and P0.72/kWh upward adjustments, respectively, in generation charge as a result of the Malampaya maintenance shutdown. Malampaya fuels the 1,200- megawatt (MW) Ilijan, 1,000-MW Sta. Rita and the 500-MW San Lorenzo natural gas plants. These plants then use more expensive alternative fuel while Malampaya is off line.

"The rate increases expected are different because the shutdown straddles two supply months and that's around 10 days in March and 20 days in April," Mr. Fernandez had explained, adding that reckoning period starts on the 26th day of each month. Charges in March and April supply months will be reflected in the April and May bills.

The natural gas-fired plants fueled by Malampaya provide around 40% of Meralco's requirements, the official said, adding that the rest are sourced from bilateral contracts with generation firms and from the more expensive Wholesale Electricity Spot Market.

The generation charge accounts for around 56% of total charges in Meralco's bill. The rest consist of the distribution charge (17%), transmission charge (10%), system loss charge (5%), as well as taxes and other charges (12%). 

ANALYSTS' MARCH INFLATION ESTIMATES				
				
Luis F. Dumlao (ADMU)				2.0 - 2.5%
Mitzie Irene P. Conchada (DLSU)			2.3 - 2.4%
Nicholas Antonio T. Mapa (BPI)			2.50%
Patrick M. Ella	(Security Bank)			2.57%
Victor A. Abola	(UA&P)				2.60%
Gundy Cahyadi(DBS)				2.60%
Philip McNicholas (BNP Paribas)			2.60%
Jonathan L. Ravelas (BDO Unibank)		2.70%
Ildemarc C. Bautista (Metrobank)		2.80%
Eugenia Fabon Victorino	(ANZ Bank)		2.80%
Remrick E. Patagan (IDEA)			2.90%
