US inflation fears fail to ruffle flat Aussie dollar

The Australian dollar edged slightly higher in subdued trading on Wednesday as investors awaited further signals on monetary policy and inflation from around the world.

In late local trade, the Aussie was buying US78.73¢, down from overnight highs of US79.40¢, but ahead of the US78.60¢ registered at the same time on Tuesday. The currency was largely flat throughout the local trading session on Wednesday.

The surge above US79¢ to a new two-month high in international trade had come despite data from the US showing a small increase in core inflation to 1.7 per cent, and an acceleration in the pace of new home sales.

Analysts noted that the local unit hit its peak just as the inflation data was released. Inflation has become key to the US Federal Reserve's next move on interest rates.

The central bank last week reiterated the importance of its 2 per cent target when weighing up when to increase rates for the first time in nine months.

Some commentators are calling an end to the greenback's seven-month bull run, while others say it still has upside as the Fed edges towards the inevitable tightening cycle.

"How US inflation holds up in the face of a stronger [US] dollar and potentially lower import prices will be one of the most closely watched features of the world economic landscape over coming months," CMC Markets' Ric Spooner said.

"Consumer prices excluding food and energy have increased at an annualised rate of 1.7 per cent over the past six months and are so far holding up reasonably well."

On the domestic front on Wednesday, the Reserve Bank of Australia's Financial Stability Review was the only release promising to move the Aussie as traders and investors looked for signs that overheated property markets may dissuade the RBA from cutting the cash rate again.

However, the report simply reiterated RBA concerns about the build-up of property investor loans and how this was being addressed through macro-prudential measures.

The tone left economists sticking to their forecasts of a second cash rate cut, to 2 per cent, either next month or in May, after the RBA's first reduction in 18 months in February.

"While the RBA clearly remains somewhat concerned about imbalances in the housing market, we do not expect that these concerns will prevent it from cutting rates again in the coming months," ANZ Banking Group co-head of Australia economics Felicity Emmett said.

"Localised speculative elements in the housing market have been apparent for some time now and, given that they didn't stand in the way of the RBA kicking off a fresh easing cycle in February, we expect that will continue."
