Eurozone Sees More Signs Of End to Deflation Fears

Prices at eurozone factory gates rose in February for the first time in five months, a sign that inflation may soon return to the currency area, although at modest rates.

Separately, surveys of purchasing managers showed that while the eurozone economy grew a little less rapidly than first estimated in March, it expanded at the fastest pace in 11 months.

The European Union's statistics agency on Tuesday said producer prices in February were 0.5% higher than in January, the largest month-to-month rise since August 2012.

That was the first increase since September, but still left prices 2.8% lower than in February 2014.

The rise in prices at the factory gates may indicate that consumers will soon be paying more for the goods and services they buy, ending a worrying period of falling prices that started in December and eased in March.

Prices at the factory gates influence, but don't translate directly into, prices paid by consumers. With the unemployment rate close to a record high, wages rising slowly, and credit from banks in short supply, consumer-oriented businesses are unlikely to believe they can raise their prices sharply even when the cost of the goods they purchase is increasing.

The rise in producer prices was driven by energy producers, who raised their tariffs by 2% from January to February. However, those price rises may not be sustained if the cost of oil and natural gas decline again.

The ECB last month launched a program of bond-buying, known as quantitative easing, in which it will buy more than €1 trillion ($1.09 trillion) of mostly government bonds by September 2016, using newly created money.

The main aim of the program is to lift the inflation rate back toward the central bank's target of just under 2%, something it doesn't expect to happen until 2017.

The surveys of purchasing managers add to other signs that the eurozone economy is starting to emerge from a long period of near stagnation, aided by lower oil prices, a weakening euro and firming confidence.

Data firm Markit, which surveys more than 5,000 businesses across the eurozone, said Tuesday its composite purchasing managers index—a measure of activity in the manufacturing and services sectors—rose to 54 in March from 53.3 in February. Markit had earlier estimated the PMI rose to 54.1. A reading below 50 indicates activity is declining, while a reading above that level indicates it is increasing.

The surveys indicated the pickup in activity is likely to be sustained, with new orders rising at the fastest pace in almost four years.

In response, businesses hired new workers at the fastest rate since August 2011, although it will likely take many months to return unemployment to precrisis levels from the 11.3% rate recorded in February.

Ireland and Spain led the March pickup, with Germany and Italy also recording accelerations. However, French activity grew at a slower pace.
