Interest rate-setter urges calm over zero inflation and says prices will increase later this year; Monetary policy

Britain should not panic and cut interest rates because inflation has dropped to zero and is heading into negative territory, one of the most dovish Bank of England policy makers has told the Financial Times.

David Miles, a member of the Monetary Policy Committee, said he thought inflation would rise towards the end of the year and there was no sign of deflationary forces holding back spending or investment.

His intervention shows that Andy Haldane, BoE chief economist, is failing to win over his natural dovish allies on the MPC - Mr Haldane said last week that the next move in rates was as likely to be down as up .

Speaking before the central bank enters a self-imposed period of silence in the run-up to the general election on May 7, Mr Miles, who will remain on the MPC until August, warned against "a knee-jerk reaction to the current inflation".

"It's wise to hold your nerve and not to get panicked into a response to the current [zero] rate," he said.

He thought the annual inflation rate was likely to stay low and move into negative territory over the next few months, before rising towards the end of this year, when the fall in oil prices will no longer be a factor in the 12-month comparison period.

Mr Miles said: "What I don't see at the moment is persistent underlying deflationary pressures in the UK - they are striking by their absence."

In these circumstances, he was happy with the guidance given by the majority on the committee that interest rate rises are coming but are likely to be gradual and limited.

In contrast to Mr Haldane, he said: "It is more likely than not that the next move in [interest rates] will be up. Quite when that will come will depend on how the data play out."

Signalling his view that the amount of spare capacity in the economy is lower than he thought, Mr Miles has moved from being the MPC member keenest to stimulate the economy with more quantitative easing to a position at the centre ground of the committee.

As long as there was a strong possibility inflation would rise back towards the Bank of England's 2 per cent target, rate rises could even accompany negative inflation, he said.

"I can certainly imagine a situation where inflation is under the target level perhaps by a significant amount and the right strategy would be gradually to start a process of normalisation and edging [interest rates] up - that's not by any means a low probability event," Mr Miles said. That would mirror the situation in late 2011, he added, when inflation was far above target at about 5 per cent and the BoE stimulated the economy with additional quantitative easing.

In a sideswipe at Mr Haldane, who said in a recent speech that if a computer algorithm were setting rates, they would be cut in the short term, Mr Miles said no model was able to reflect all the forces on the economy or inflation. An algorithm was a "very imperfect guide to policy, [which] to me smacks of fine tuning [and] has never really been a very sensible strategy".

He also warned against using other central banks' policies as a guide for UK interest rates.
