Spain’s Economy to Grow 2.8% in 2015; Bank of Spain raises growth forecast as lower prices drive internal demand

MADRID—Spain's economy keeps accelerating and may grow 0.8% in the first quarter of this year from the last quarter of 2014, as lower consumer prices drive internal demand, the country's central bank said Thursday.

The eurozone's fourth-largest economy is likely to grow 2.5% on an annual basis in the first quarter, the Bank of Spain said in a monthly report. The bank also raised its forecast for economic growth this year to 2.8% from 2% previously. In 2016, the central bank said it expects the economy to grow 2.7%.

Spain's economy grew 1.4% in 2014, the first year it has expanded since the country's real-estate market collapsedin 2008.

While the sustained growth has been welcomed by consumers, businesses and lawmakers alike, Spain's unemployment rate remains a concern.

The jobless rate may be 22.2% at the end of this year, a slight decline from almost 24% at the end of 2014, and 20.5% in 2016, despite strong growth in employment, the central bank said.

This is largely because, after two consecutive years of declines, the Bank of Spain is anticipating a gradual recovery in the labor force.

This is in line with recent population flow trends that indicate lower emigration and increasing immigration to one of the eurozone's few large economies that is growing significantly, as well as an increase in the number of previously discouraged job seekers who are trying to return to the workforce.

Among the reasons for Spain's unexpectedly strong economic takeoff, the Bank of Spain cited solid international demand for Spanish products amid a weaker euro and a continued slide in borrowing costs for Spain's companies, as well as developments that are largely the result of monetary policy easing by the European Central Bank.

These factors may contribute to keeping Spain in deflationary conditions over the coming months, but the central bank said underlying inflation trends are turning positive in response to stronger consumer demand. This means that, in the absence of further energy price decreases, Spain's consumer-price index may turn positive again soon.

This should have a slightly negative effect on domestic demand, the central bank said, noting that private consumption should rise 3.3% this year and slow to 2.4% next year as price increases lead to less spending.

“Deflation is one of the key supports for an increasingly broad-based recovery, with falling prices helping to end the prolonged decline in real incomes," said Raj Badiani, an analyst with HIS Global Insight.

On average, the Bank of Spain said Spain's CPI should fall 0.2% this year and rise 1.2% in 2016.
