How deflation gave lower prices a bad name

In 2009, the Bank of Japan conducted a public survey on deflation. After a "lost decade" of falling prices, the results were unexpected. Instead of expressing horror at the idea of deflation, 44 per cent of those surveyed deemed it "favourable"; 35 per cent felt neutral; and just 20.7 per cent found it "unfavourable". Although a subsequent survey painted a slightly more negative picture, the pattern was clear. As Kathy Matsui, vice-chair of Goldman Sachs Japan, says: "More Japanese actually feel that deflation is a positive than a negative."

This intriguing finding recently popped back into my mind for two reasons. First, it is an accepted tenet of modern economics that deflation is a terrible scourge that must be avoided. Thus the European Central Bank is unleashing an unprecedented wave of asset purchases, partly sparked by the fact that consumer prices have been sliding steadily lower. In Sweden, Switzerland and Japan, similar efforts are under way.

Second, the Bank for International Settlements has just published a striking study of the history of deflation. The BIS operates as something of a central bankers' bank-cum-think-tank. Given its position, you might expect it to echo the orthodox view that deflation is a disaster.

But the study - like that BoJ survey - goes against the usual grain: it argues that price falls are not always such a disaster. Sometimes they can be almost positive.

This argument will horrify most policy makers and mainstream economists. The BIS paper begins by pointing out that price falls are not so unusual. On the contrary, it states that "deflations were very common before the second world war". And even in the postwar period, there have been 100 or so transitory deflations in the 38 economies that the BIS studies, including four persistent ones (in China, Hong Kong and - twice - in Japan).

Crucially, you cannot assume that falls in the price of goods (such as food or travel) and assets (shares, houses and so on) are the same. Economists typically assume these price falls go hand in hand, and use the "d" word to describe both. But their impact can differ. When asset prices crash, this undermines growth because it shatters confidence and increases the size of debt relative to assets. But if the price of goods and services declines, the result is more mixed.

If wages stay high as prices fall, that can hurt productivity and undermine growth. Falling income can also sometimes make it harder to repay debt. But lower prices can boost consumer and corporate spending power, and thus confidence. And in practical terms, the BIS research shows there have been numerous periods since 1870 when deflation occurred amid growth. "It raises questions about the prevailing view that goods and services price deflations, even if persistent, are always pernicious," the report states.

The BIS argues that even in the 1930s it was falling asset prices that caused the real damage. And while Japan is often considered a classic example of how deflation can create stagnation, the BIS argues that, on a per-capita basis, growth in Japan has actually not lagged that badly behind America in the past decade, once you factor in the shrinking population.

Plenty of economists may disagree. When I talked about the BoJ poll a couple of years ago with some western policy makers, I was told it simply showed that ordinary people do not understand how economics works.

But if the BIS paper is even half correct to point out that our modern terror of deflation is overblown, the raison d'être of the current wild, radical monetary policy experiments is not nearly as compelling as it seems. And this is a thought-provoking idea to ponder, whatever you feel about that "d" word. Particularly in a week when men such as James Bullard, a Fed governor, have warned that excessively loose monetary policy is now inflating gigantic asset bubbles. And it is a fair bet that those asset prices will eventually tumble - creating the type of economic damage that gives deflation such a bad name.

gillian.tett@ft.com
