Good news for savers at last

Zero inflation figure means real return,

NEWS that inflation has fallen to zero per cent is a rare moment of joy for savers, finally boosting their chances of getting a real return on their money.

Inflation figures released yesterday showed that the consumer price index (CPI) fell from 0.3 per cent to 0.0 per cent in February, largely thanks to falling oil and food prices.

By shopping around, savers can now find instant access savings accounts paying rates of up to 1.50 per cent, or as much as 3 per cent if you are prepared to tie your money up in a fixed-rate bond.

Sylvia Waycot, editor at MoneyFacts, says: "Savers will find that the interest they earn now has more spending power."

This follows a dismal five years when millions of savers were getting a below inflation return, she says. "If five years ago you saved £10,000, allowing for average interest and tax at 20 per cent, it would have spending power of just £8,792 today - a fall of more than 12 per cent in real terms."

Falling inflation is the second piece of good news for savers in a week, following Chancellor George Osborne's Budget decision last Wednesday to lift 17 million ordinary savers out of tax altogether.

From April next year, basic rate taxpayers can receive up to £1,000 of savings interest free of tax.

Waycot says savers who took out the top paying easy access account from Kent Reliance, which pays 1.50 per cent, would need a balance of £66,667 to amass £1,000 of interest.

The top paying one-year bond from Shawbrook pays a yearly rate of 1.85 per cent. To earn £1,000 you would need a balance of £54,054. The top five-year bond, also from Shawbrook, pays 3.00 per cent, so you would need a balance of £33,333 to amass £1,000 of interest.

Anna Bowes, director of independent savings website Savings Champion, says the low inflation outlook has boosted the arguments in favour locking your money away for longer periods. "Longer term fixed rates are now looking like a much more appealing option than once was thought."

Vince Smith Hughes, retirement expert at Prudential, says zero per cent inflation is particularly good news for pensioners, who spend more of their income on food and energy. "Better still, the State pension will increase by 2.5 per cent in April, meaning many pensioners will see significant real-term increases to their incomes."

Savers may be celebrating today but many will be worried that a drop in the inflation rate will encourage banks and building societies to slash savings rates to even lower levels.

Some analysts believe inflation will turn negative next month as the UK slips into deflation.

Ben Brettell, senior economist at Hargreaves Lansdown, says the first Bank of England base rate hike looks increasingly distant. "With deflation looming, I don't see rates rising until mid-2016 at the very earliest."

There was some positive news yesterday as Virgin Money improved two of its fixed rate Isas.

It now offers a one-year bond paying 1.65 per cent and a five-year bond paying 2.35 per cent, both free of tax.
