Abe Is Behind BOJ In Policy Grades; Economists in Wall Street Journal Survey Praise Effort to Stoke Inflation but Say More Is Needed to Revive Growth

Bank of Japan Gov. Haruhiko Kuroda has done a good job of attempting to stoke inflation in Japan, but Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will have to try a little harder if he is going to get the world's third-largest economy humming again.

That is the rough result of a Wall Street Journal survey of 33 economists in the U.S. and Japan marking two years since Mr. Kuroda introduced his radical monetary-easing policy with the backing of Mr. Abe. The two are trying to reverse roughly 15 years of deflation in Japan, during which prices, wages and spending steadily fell.

Respondents were asked to complete an online survey between March 26 and April 1. Nearly three quarters gave Mr. Kuroda an A or a B when asked to assign a letter grade to the central banker's attempts to achieve the bank's stated goal of 2% inflation. In contrast, 50% of participants gave Mr. Abe a C, and only one gave the prime minister an A.

Nathaniel Karp, chief U.S. economist of BBVA Research, said of the BOJ's policies: “Strong effort, but other structural measures are needed. However, these are outside the scope of BOJ."

Though economists gave the BOJ points for trying, more than half said that Japan still hadn't overcome deflation, and two-thirds forecast the Bank of Japan wouldn't hit its 2% inflation target. That puts Japan in a worse position than in April 2014, when the Journal conducted a similar survey. Then, only one third of respondents said Japan hadn't yet put an end to deflation.

Inflation in Japan has fallen back in the past year partly because of a fall in oil prices that many economists say they didn't expect. Excluding the effects of a sales-tax increase, prices were flat in February, according to the most recent government figures.

The median forecast for Japan's core consumer-price index in the Journal's latest survey was 0.7% in March 2016 and 1.1% the same month the following year. Of those surveyed, 60% said the Bank of Japan shouldn't exit from its easing program until inflation is achieved.

“As the U.S. experience has taught, don't be frozen by a specific date. Wait until the data tells a good story," said Sam Kahan and Jim Miel of ACT Research.

Nearly 40% said that the bank should implement additional easing measures between July and December this year, while 45% said no more easing was needed.

Respondents weren't so easy on Mr. Abe. “Intent to fight economic malaise is important, but very little was put on the table. Momentum is sadly lost," said Manish Sharma, professor at Doshisha Business School.

About half of respondents, or 52%, said the prime minister's long-term growth strategy, also known as the third arrow of his so-called Abenomics program to revive Japan's economy, was adequate or somewhat adequate. The first two arrows are monetary and fiscal stimulus.
