Housing market on alert for tremors as inflation hits zero

Short-term help could turn into long-term market freeze, experts warn

INFLATION hit zero for the first time on record last month, prompting concerns that long-term deflation could wreak havoc in a muted UK housing market already spooked by general election uncertainty.

Data from the Office of National Statistics showed that inflation for the year to February fell back to nothing, having been at 0.3pc in the year to January, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, after food, toys, games and books grew cheaper.

In the short term, lower-cost consumer products can be good news for home owners counting on their house price going up. But if deflation goes on for only a fraction too long, it can flip a switch in the housing market.

Deflation is categorised into two types: "good deflation" and "bad deflation". But in housing there is a fine line between the two.

Good deflation is generally created by bountiful, growing supply, and is a sign that the wheels of industry are turning.

The recent oversupply of oil has led to falling prices at the petrol pump, and reduced the costs of production and transport for material goods, contributing to disinflation in the UK.

It has also enabled intense competition among supermarkets as they reduce food prices to ward off discount grocers Aldi and Lidl, and the end result is a cheaper basket of shopping.

Lower day-to-day prices puts more money in the householder's pocket, meaning they are more likely to consider a move for an extra bedroom or 50sq ft of garden. With interest rates also low, credit becomes cheaper, leading to more activity in the mortgage market.

"More pounds in the pocket means there is more ability to withstand mortgage payments," said Jan Crosby, head of real estate at KPMG. "In turn this will drive transactions and confidence," and therefore give house prices a boost. For Adam Challis, head of residential research at JLL, "good" and "bad" deflation is another way of saying long and short term.

"Good deflation means there is no expectation that things are going to keep getting cheaper. People just spend now, money will swill around for a bit and have a positive impact on the housing market."

However, if people think deflation will still be here tomorrow they will underinvest today, he said. It is at this point that deflation can turn bad. Bad deflation - as seen in Japan over the past two decades and now a lurking threat in the eurozone - is down to subdued inflationary pressures. People stop buying goods as they predict prices will be cheaper later, sending products into a value spiral, hitting business turnover and therefore, eventually, jobs.

According to Anthony Codling, an analyst at the broker Jefferies, this is bad news for existing home owners.

New data from the ONS has shown that UK house prices fell 0.2pc between December and January, while the annual rate slipped from 9.8pc to December to 8.4pc for the 12 months to January - and any slight drop in house prices makes it harder for people to move.

"If property prices drop, existing home owners will struggle to trade up, as a lower selling price will force them to take on a higher loan-to-value mortgage," said Mr Codling.

A subtle shift in the homeowner's mindset about deflation - for example people worrying about their job prospects or potential reductions in pay packet - will also inhibit the potential mover, quashing sales volumes.

In a bad deflationary environment people delay buying a new television because they think it will be cheaper in six months. The same applies to the housing market.

"Why would you buy if you think prices are going to go lower? Home owners like buying into a rising market," said Mr Codling.

Bad deflation is indicative of a weakening economy which will also knock a housing market so sensitive to interest rate noise or political events such as the general election.

"I think we are comfortable that deflation is temporary and not expected to be an embedded part of the UK economic story," said Mr Challis.

And if Britain looks as if it will fall into longer term or bad deflation, the Governor of the Bank of England can theoretically reverse it by lowering interest rates even further. Which is, of course, another story for the housing market.
