Inflation is low but living costs rise

INFLATION at an unprecedented zero per cent and food prices having fallen dramatically over the past year will offer much-needed respite for those on low and middle incomes in the capital.

Some might use this as evidence that living standards are on the up but don't forget that for years cost of living rises have consistently outstripped wage growth in London. Since 2010 food prices have risen 13 per cent, with housing, fuel and travel costs growing 20 per cent or more. Over the same period the average wage has only increased 3.5 per cent.

Meanwhile, the number of people being paid less than the London Living Wage has jumped up 65 per cent, with 917,000 Londoners now earning less money than is deemed necessary to live in the capital.

With most Londoners feeling the cost of living has increased in the past year, today's inflation figures will provide some limited relief — but it does not solve the problem. Fiona Twycross AM (Lab) THE news on inflation has been predictably greeted by George Osborne as a vindication of his economic strategy. In reality, he can claim little credit for the fall in prices, as it is the result of the plummeting price of oil feeding into falling costs of transport and energy. That decline in the oil price has now come to an end. Meanwhile, research by the New Economics Foundation shows the poorest households are not gaining from falling prices as they consume far less in terms of transport than the rest of the population.

And while declining prices mean most households' money goes further, the boost can only be temporary. As prices fall, suppliers will look to cut costs — including wages and salaries. When households have very high debts, as they do in the UK, this deflation is deadly for an economy.

To avoid this danger, action needs to be taken now to boost wages. Ending the one per cent public sector pay limit and lifting the minimum wage to living wage levels would boost household incomes and sustain demand.

Dr James Meadway, New Economics Foundation WITH wage growth finally picking up and prices at the same level as a year ago, there is no question that the current inflationary environment bodes well for tackling the cost of living crisis.

However, a period of deflation, even if brief, will leave its mark on tax income. VAT receipts will be among the most impacted revenue streams as they rely partly on underlying price growth.

This week both Labour and the Tories announced their pledges not to raise VAT following the election — a move that will please many voters. It remains to be seen how either party will address the adverse impact on tax receipts which "lowflation" in the UK may cause.

Nina Skero, Centre for Economics and Business Research

In reality, Osborne can claim little credit for the fall in prices, as it is the result of the plummeting price of oil feeding into falling costs of transport and energy Dr James Meadway
