0% INFLATION? NOT IF YOU PAY COUNCIL TAX OR USE WATER

FAMILIES face a raft of price hikes from this week on everything from the cost of a bath to prescription medicines.

Advice organisations fear consumers could be lulled into a 'false sense of security' by the current Consumer Price Index 'zero' measure of inflation and fail to budget for the price rises.

Increases are due in council tax, water bills, vehicle excise duty, NHS charges, stamps and even Sky television packages.

Inflation is currently 0 per cent and predicted to show a minus figure for March and April.

The collapse in the cost of oil and petrol in the past year has had a dramatic impact on living standards - with Prime Minister David Cameron saying it has given families an extra £20 per week - while a supermarket price war has delivered savings on food.

But Hannah Maundrell, editor in chief of advice website money.co.uk , said: 'It really worries me that so much talk of 0 per cent inflation will make consumers sit on their hands in the false sense of security that prices for everything will remain static.

'Regardless of the economic terminology, consumers still need to save money wherever they can to accommodate rising costs in some areas of their finances.' The average council tax bill for a Band D property will go up by £16 a year to £1,484 from tomorrow. Water bills will go up by an average of £5 a year to £401 for the average household from tomorrow as privatised firms continue to soak customers while paying millions to their mostly foreign shareholders.

Also going up tomorrow is car tax, with vehicle excise duty set to increase by up to £10 for some categories of vehicles, particularly larger cars with big engines and higher carbon emissions.

In health, people who need regular prescriptions will see the charge rise from £8.08 to £8.20. At the same time, the cost of going to see the dentist for NHS care - if you can find one - is also on the rise. The NHS charge payable for a band one course of treatment, something like a filling, will increase by 30p from £18.50 to £18.80. Band two treatment goes up by 80p to £51.30 and band three by £3.50 to £222.50.

Yesterday, the cost of a first-class stamp went up by a penny to 64p and second-class rose by 1p to 54p.

And Sky recently announced a series of price rises. From June, its popular family bundle will rise by £3 to £36 a month.

© Daily Mail
