Japan’s Inflation Is Not a Worry

In February, prices in Japan were flat from a year ago. But that doesn't mean the country's battle against deflation has been in vain.

The change in Japan's consumer-price index, excluding food and the higher consumption tax, came to exactly zero in February. This has prompted hand-wringing that the country has failed to banish deflation—a damaging spiral of falling wages and prices—even after two years of aggressive stimulus.

The worries are overdone. The Bank of Japan has clearly missed its target, declared at the start of its easing campaign two years ago, to hit 2% inflation in two years. But this is due to factors largely beyond its control: sharply falling oil prices and last year's increase in the consumption tax.

That said, zero isn't the lower bound for Japanese inflation. Prices could turn negative in coming months, as utility companies cut charges after a lag. But lower energy costs will be a boon to the country's economy in the long term, putting more cash in the pockets of consumers and businesses.

Of course, even the “core-core" CPI, which excludes energy and food, was up just 0.3% from a year earlier in February. This likely reflects the lingering effects on demand from last year's three-percentage-point increase in the consumption tax.

The concern is these temporary disruptions could conspire to keep Japanese people trapped in a “deflationary mind-set." To head that off, some speculate that the Bank of Japan might ease policy again as soon as next month.

But a deflationary mind-set takes more than just CPI turning briefly negative. Other recent data show demand strengthening. Household consumption rose 0.8% from a month earlier in February. The labor market is tight, with the unemployment rate falling to 3.5% from 3.6% a month earlier. And Japan's largest companies have just agreed to the biggest wage increases in many years.

And besides consumer prices, asset prices, from stocks to land, are rising. Export volumes are rising. This isn't what deflation looks like.

Japan may have laid a goose egg on inflation. But with so much else going in the right direction, the Bank of Japan is unlikely to ramp up the stimulus just yet.

Aaron Back
