Slow Rise in Inflation Delays Fed Rate Hike

When will Janet Yellen & Co. finally declare victory over inflation?

Such a victory by the central bank used to mean curbing inflation's rise. Today, it means nudging inflation high enough so that prices start increasing by 2% a year, the hurdle that inflation must overcome before the Federal Open Market Committee begins hiking the short-term interest rate from the current target of 0% to 0.25%.

As noted last week (“The Ugly Side of the Fed's Reluctance to Raise Rates," March 23), vast numbers of investors and savers are getting hurt by this punitive policy, especially senior citizens who normally park their funds in bank certificates of deposit. If the victims were to stage a mass protest in front of Yellen's office to declare their grievances, one of their placards might read: “When will your FOMC finally decide that it's seen the whites of 2% inflation's eyes?"

In fairness, 2% annually amounts to a slowing of inflation over the long run. It translates to a doubling in prices every 35 years, and, in fact, over the past 35 years, prices as measured by the personal consumption expenditures price index have more than doubled, climbing by nearly 2.6 times. According to the better-known consumer price index, prices are 2.8 times higher than those 35 years ago.

I CITE THE PCE price index because Yellen herself has stated that it's the measure of choice. In recent testimony before the Senate, she was clear on this point: “The Federal Open Market Committee's 2% objective refers to the increase—the annual increase in the total PCE price index that includes food and energy."

And in written testimony, she observed that “U.S. inflation continues to run below the committee's 2% objective," citing “the recent softness in the all-items measure of inflation for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)."

The bad news is that the PCE price index generally rises more slowly than the other index of choice, the consumer price index, as indicated by the numbers cited earlier on 35-year increases. So if Yellen had instead chosen the CPI, she would likely be able to declare victory for the 2% objective sooner than with the PCE.

That's because the CPI tracks a basket of goods and services that is generally fixed from one period to the next (at this point, based on consumer expenditure surveys for 2011 and 2012), while the PCE price index is necessarily more flexible. Designed to deflate nominal consumer spending and turn it into inflation-adjusted outlays, it must keep readjusting its weightings to reflect what consumers actually buy from one period to the next. Since consumers tend to shift from higher- to lower-priced goods and services when the opportunities present themselves, the personal consumption expenditures price index will generally rise more slowly than the consumer price index.

AS YELLEN HAS OBSERVED, “The PCE price index edged down during the fourth quarter of last year and looks to be on track to register a more significant decline this quarter because of falling consumer energy prices." Given her stated loyalty to the “all-items" PCE, it would appear that achieving the 2% target is unusually dependent on the trend in the price of energy. Weighed down by low energy prices, both the CPI and PCE have been running at around a zero rate.

But happily and not surprisingly, the Fed chair leaves herself a lot of leeway to interpret the trends according to her own lights. Since the effects of Federal Reserve policy generally take some time to be felt, changes in policy are supposed to be pre-emptive. And in that regard, Yellen specifically endorses “so-called core inflation that strips out" food and energy prices “in order to get a better forecast sometimes of the underlying trends in inflation." She even stipulates that, in order to get a handle on the future, “we look at the CPI, which is well known to most Americans."

As the chart on this page shows, the 12-month trend in the core consumer price index through February, released last week, ran at 1.7%, while the 12-month trend in the core personal consumption expenditures price index through January, was 1.3%; the February update on PCE will be released Monday. So bondholders take note: Based on either measure, we're more than halfway toward the 2% goal.

E-mail: gepstein@barrons.com
