ANZ sees 6.3% 2015 PHL growth on gov't spending

THE ECONOMY is expected to accelerate this year amid a manageable inflation environment, robust domestic activity, and higher government spending, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. (ANZ Bank) said late last week, but the pace of expansion is still likely to fall short of the official target.

"[G]rowth is likely to accelerate to 6.3% in 2015 from 6.1% last year," ANZ Bank said in a March 26 note to clients.

The bank said that the forecast - which falls below the government's 7%- 8% target for 2015 - is underpinned by the country's "low inflation environment", "firm domestic demand", and "increased public spending."

"Bank lending remains robust amid calibrated liquidity," ANZ bank noted.

"Meanwhile, the business confidence index for Q2 improved to 58.2% from 43.1% in the previous survey, suggesting an uptick in activity the next quarter," it added, referring to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas' (BSP) first-quarter Business Expectations Survey that was released just last month.

Philippine gross domestic product (GDP) expanded by 6.1% last year, a few points shy of the government's 6.5%-7.5% target.

Crawling farm sector output and lower than programmed - and at times even contracting - state spending had weighed on growth for much of last year.

This year, the government expects GDP to accelerate to 7%-8%.

As the inflation outlook remains stable even as prospects for economic activity are still deemed strong, ANZ Bank maintained its view that the BSP has "enough room to maintain current monetary conditions through 2015, despite the upward pressure in inflation due to rising electricity prices and minimum wages."

The bank added that it expects inflation to average 3.0% this year, well within the BSP's 2%-4% target but higher than the official 2.2% forecast. The BSP's average estimate was lowered from 2.3% during the recent rate review of the central bank.

The BSP last March 26 left its monetary policy untouched for the fourth time in a row in the face of a manageable inflation environment and buoyant domestic activity.

Overnight borrowing and lending rates were kept at 4.0% and 6.0%, respectively; special deposit account rates were also maintained at 2.50%, while banks' reserve requirement ratios were left unchanged as well.

The central bank's decision to keep its policy settings steady broke ranks with many of its counterparts in the region, who have slashed their borrowing costs since the year began to ward off deflationary pressures and prod growth.

BSP Deputy Governor Diwa C. Guinigundo explained last March 26 that the main external factor that will influence the country's monetary policy stance would be the planned interest rate hike in the United States rather than policy adjustments in the region. 
