Venezuela tops 'most at risk' index as crime trumps oil

Conflict with Russia drags down Ukraine but Norway still safest for investors, report finds

VENEZUELA has been classified as the most at risk country in the world, plagued by high inflation, massive public debt and malfunctioning markets, according to a leading global report.

Despite its enormous oil reserves, the densely populated South American country fell into recession last year, with inflation reaching 68.5pc in December and poverty biting.

In combination with soaring crime levels and political corruption, Venezuela came bottom of the 2015 resilience index, as measured by the international insurance firm FM Global , which lists the countries from those most resilient to disaster down to those deemed to be most at risk.

The ranking placed Mauritania and Kyrgyzstan as the second and third most at-risk countries behind Venezuela, with economic productivity, businesses, infrastructure and supply chain all vulnerable to catastrophe.

The report found that these countries, languishing in the bottom five with the Dominican Republic and Nicaragua, could be thrown into turmoil by an oil shock or natural disaster.

Meanwhile, Ukraine and Kazakhstan, both mid-table, fell 31 places each in this year's index, more than any other country.

For the Ukraine, the report claimed that this was a direct result of the ongoing conflict with Russia in the southern and eastern parts of the country.

"The fall in Ukraine's position in the index has been most marked with respect to an intensified political risk and deteriorating infrastructure: transport, telephony and energy," said Bret Ahnell, vice-president of operations at FM Global .

The data underpinning the firm's 2015 index was sourced before the most recent outbreak of fighting, and Ukraine's situation has deteriorated since.

"For Kazakhstan, the cause of its fall is different, and relates to a poorer commitment to natural hazard risk management in the region than last year, a deterioration shared by Tajikistan and Mongolia," Mr Ahnell added.

Turkey's fall of 27 places is traceable to a decline in its risk management planning by businesses, particularly in regards to the prevention of natural hazards and fire risk.

Thailand, which is ranked 82, has dropped 20 places in this year's index due to supply chain factors; in particular, a poorer perception of both the quality of its overall infrastructure and the quality of its local suppliers.

Mr Ahnell said that a weak supply chain, easily knocked by oil shocks, natural disaster or conflict, was at the heart of the index, making some countries economically fragile and unattractive to foreign investors and multinational companies.

"If your supply chain fails, it can be dif-ficult or impossible to get your market share, revenue and reputation back," he said.

At the other end of the index, Norway retained its ranking as the most resilient country in the world in 2015, followed by Switzerland and the Netherlands.

The Scandinavian country is best suited for companies seeking to avoid disruptions in their global supply chain operations, the report found.

Norway has strong results for economic productivity, control of corruption, political risk and resilience to an oil shock, but the research showed that its management of fire risk needs to improve. The UK remained at 20. In 2014 the Dominican Republic (now 126) was last, of 130.

Most resilient countries

1. Norway (right)

2. Switzerland

3. Netherlands

4. Ireland

5. Luxembourg

6. Germany

7. Qatar

8. Canada

9. Finland

10. United States- Region 3 (Central)

Least resilient countries

121. Tajikistan

122. Egypt

123. Pakistan

124. Jamaica

125. Honduras

126. Dominican Republic

127. Nicaragua

128. Mauritania

129. Kyrgyz Republic

130. Venezuela (right)

68.5pc Inflation in Venezuela in December, according to a risk list compiled by international inurance firm FM Global
