Eurozone deflation eases as asset purchases take effect; Prices

Deflation in the eurozone showed signs of slowing in March following the launch of the European Central Bank 's €1.1tn asset buying programme to stave off prolonged low inflation.

Prices fell for the fourth consecutive month but did so less steeply than in previous months, as a weaker euro helped ease deflation across the eurozone. The euro has dropped almost a fifth against the dollar over the past year, thanks in part to the ECB's quantitative easing programme.

Inflation stood at minus 0.1 per cent year-on-year in March, according to Eurostat . The drop in prices compared to a 0.3 per cent fall in February and 0.6 per cent dip in January.

But core inflation, which strips out the cost of food and energy, slowed to 0.6 per cent in March from 0.7 per cent in February, leading economists to argue that a continued period of deflation was still possible even with quantitative -easing.

"The latest data on eurozone inflation and unemployment do little to diminish the danger of a prolonged period of deflation in the currency union," said Jonathan Loynes, chief European economist at Capital Economics.

The biggest cause of the fall in prices - which was in line with forecasts - was energy, where prices tumbled 5.8 per cent. That was significantly lower than the 7.9 per cent fall recorded by the category in February.

There was better news in the unemployment figures, which fell to a near three-year low in the latest sign of economic improvement in the bloc.

The jobless rate fell to 11.3 per cent in February from 11.4 per cent the previous month - a figure revised up from 11.2 per cent. Across all 28 EU member states the unemployment rate was 9.8 per cent in February, down from 10.5 per cent the year before.

The improved figures come a week after a purchasing managers' poll implied eurozone economic activity was increasing at its quickest pace in four years. "The economic tailwinds of cheap oil, a weaker euro and aggressive ECB easing will boost growth this year," said Christian Schulz, senior economist at Berenberg. "It would be premature to even consider scaling back the stimulus before September 2016."

Mario Draghi, the ECB president, has attributed much of the bloc's improved growth to the weaker euro. 3 Turkey's growth slowed in 2014 and demand has been weak in the early months of this year, according to data that highlighted the economic challenges facing the ruling AK party ahead of elections in June.

Gross domestic product grew 2.9 per cent in 2014, compared with a 2013 rate of 4.4 per cent. For the year as a whole, which began with a central bank interest rate rise, household demand - traditionally the motor of the Turkish economy - barely budged.

Trade data indicated the economy remaining relatively weak this year, with exports and imports both falling in February, by 6 per cent and 7.2 per cent respectively.

The figures came out yesterday, when life in much of Turkey was disrupted by a mysterious power cut that hit more than 20 cities, forcing the closure of the Istanbul and Ankara metros and grounding flights.
