Zero Hour for Global Inflation and Rates

First it was interest rates. Now it is inflation. Zero is becoming an uncomfortably familiar number. But unpicking the puzzle of ultralow inflation is vital.

Even factoring in lower oil prices, the current readings are remarkable. Annual headline inflation in the U.S. was zero in February. Before its dip into negative territory amid the financial crisis, it had been positive since 1955. Zeroes (or even lower numbers) feature in inflation data from the U.K., Japan and the eurozone, too.

Inflation is down despite unprecedented monetary policy. Rates are close to zero and trillions of dollars' worth of quantitative easing has been unleashed. Meanwhile, ultralow inflation also stands at odds with falling unemployment.

So far markets and central bankers seem more worried than consumers. Very low long-term yields portend a grim future; falling market measures of medium-term inflation have flustered central bankers, especially at the European Central Bank. Even in the U.S., the five-year/five-year forward measure of inflation has fallen.

That is puzzling. The ECB might lack credibility on its willingness to push up inflation. But the Federal Reserve should have fewer problems: Indeed, there have been hints that inflation running above target for a bit would be fine. Still, markets appear worried.

Consumers seem less fazed: Surveys of them in Europe and the U.S. show stable inflation expectations over the medium term, even though they often extrapolate from current levels.

Markets seem more guilty of that at present: The decline in U.S. inflation expectations is highly correlated with the fall in oil prices. They may in fact be fretting more about central banks. With rates trapped close to zero, policy makers have little room left to maneuver against falling inflation.

A historical bias may be at work. Many view central banks as institutions that fighting inflation, not stoking it. And a lot of current policy seems to be aimed at redistributing inflation via currency shifts.

An important indicator now will be wage inflation. If unemployment falls further and wages remain subdued, central banks will face an even bigger inflation puzzle. In such an unusual situation, their reliance on extraordinary measures may become ever more ordinary.

Richard Barley
