RBI: Downward revision to FY16 GDP estimates likely

The Reserve Bank of India has found a way to deal with the market's steady clamour for rate cuts. In its bi-monthly monetary policy statement, it has surprised economists with its higher-than-expected estimates on retail (CPI) inflation by March 2016.

The central bank expects CPI to accelerate to 5.8% by the end of the year, after dipping to 4% in August.

While consensus estimates on inflation is closer to 5.5%, RBI is building in a higher inflation estimate so as to cut down the clamour for a rate cut in the near-term.

Soumya Kanti Ghosh, chief economic adviser, State Bank of India, believes the CPI estimate of 5.8% is on the higher side, and, this may allow the RBI to continue on rate-easing cycle.

Others say that the central bank has done this to rule the possibility of a rate cut in the near-term.

Despite this, the market continues to build in further rate cuts. Nirmal Jain, chairman of IIFL Group, believes that evolving macro-economic situation are suggestive of lower credit costs, which would spur corporate earnings. Jain is expecting repo rate to be cut by 75 basis points over the year.

The central bank's assessment is a lot sharper on growth. So far there have been murmurings on GDP downgrades, as reality on the ground does not seem to suggest that growth is likely to accelerate to eight%, even under the new GDP series.

The RBI has stated that even though the CSO projects a robust pick-up, downward revision in growth is likely once full details of real activity in the March quarter are available.

The central bank projects GDP growth in FY16 at 7.8%, which is 30 bps higher than FY15. However, this projection comes with a downward bias. Sonal Varma of Nomura says the RBI sounded cautiously optimistic on the growth outlook.

The central bank has also said that while it will continue with its accommodative stance, further rate cuts would also depend on transmission of policy actions.

Given that transmission has not happened despite a 50 basis point rate cut, the RBI has attempted to bring about a structural change by allowing retail investment in government securities.

By doing so, the RBI is attempting to move to a situation where banks will be forced to move to a market determined rate for deposits too. With RBI allowing retail to access gilts at market rates, banks are expected to move to market determined rates on the deposit side too.

But SBI's Soumya Kanti Ghosh believes the move will make it challenging for banks to mobilize low-cost deposits, which will make it difficult to cut lending rates.
