Three reasons for inflation expectations to continue to rise

Market views on inflation have changed dramatically since January. The inflation rate priced in for the coming five years is up from January's lows by 0.5 percentage point in the euro area, by 0.3 percentage point in the US, and in the UK (where inflation pricing never fell as much) by 0.1 percentage point. The rates central bankers prefer to use to gauge the market's medium-term inflation expectations - the so-called five-year five-year forward inflation rate (ie market pricing of five-year inflation starting in five years' time) - have also moved up.

Higher market inflation expectations have important implications. For one thing, they look like a strong endorsement by the market of the European Central Bank 's quantitative easing policy . And, as Janet Yellen, chairwoman of the US Federal Reserve, intimated at the Fed's most recent press conference, they mean the central bank will be more comfortable about embarking on a rate rise cycle.

Since the ECB announced QE , the euro area's (swap-based) 5y5y forward inflation rate has risen from 1.5 per cent to 1.7 per cent. Likewise the 5y5y rate the Fed calculates from US inflation-linked bonds has risen to 1.9 per cent, and the UK's to 2.8 per cent on the retail price index (equivalent to 1.8 per cent on the consumer price index).

This rebound looks puzzling, given that consumer price inflation has fallen to - or below - 0 per cent year on year in all three regions for several months, and is widely forecast to stay there for several months to come.

There are three reasons for the inflation markets' rebound - reasons that might push market-implied inflation rates higher still. First, fundamental drivers are putting upward pressure on medium-term inflation expectations. The ECB and the Bank of Japan are creating lots of money via their QE programmes; these will continue. And more than 20 other central banks have cut their interest rates this year. Meanwhile, with rapid job creation in the UK and US, the slack in these economies is shrinking, which should lead to a pick-up in wages.

Second, some technical factors that had pushed market inflation pricing down in the half-year until January have begun to unwind. In particular the collapse in the oil price from above $110 to below $50 produced large negative monthly percentage changes in the indices used to calculate the income received from inflation-linked securities.

But with oil having stabilised in a $45-$60 range, the negative impact has diminished, making inflation products more attractive to investors. In addition, the seasonality in inflation (prices tend to fall into the January sales and rise in the spring) has switched from being a negative to a positive.

The third reason is the starting point. As the oil price collapsed last year, 5y5y inflation fell to unprecedented sub-2 per cent levels in the US and the euro area, raising fears that deflationary forces were gaining the upper hand over central banks. From those levels too much risk of deflation was priced in.

Inflation expectations are likely to rise further as the fundamental factors above continue to work through into expectations. Technical seasonal factors will also remain supportive for the next few months; and, even after the rebound since January, inflation pricing remains low by historical standards. Five-year five-year inflation expectations are still more than 0.5 percentage points below their post-financial-crisis averages, and even further below what was "normal" before that.

There are risks to this view. The soaring dollar will cut US inflation. As a rule of thumb, the 20 per cent rise in the dollar should take about 1 percentage point off US CPI during the coming 12 months. But then the weaker euro should add about the same to eurozone inflation. Weak commodity prices will also bear down on prices globally.

Certainly, then, reported inflation will not move above central banks' targets soon. But markets are forward-looking. Given supportive factors in place, low near-term inflation should not prevent market-implied expectations for medium-term inflation from rising to more typical levels.

Laurence Mutkin is global head of G10 rates strategy at BNP Paribas
