Hungarian Central Banker Sees Scope for Further Monetary Easing; Falling Prices, Foreign-Currency Loan Conversions Give Room to Maneuver

BUDAPEST—Hungary has room to cut its interest rates even more from 1.95%, the lowest on record, because of falling consumer prices and a recent conversion of foreign-currency loans into forints, which has reduced the vulnerability of households, a central banker said.

With consumer prices falling on an annual basis for sixth months in a row and posting an annual decline of 1% in February, the central bank last week cut its main interest rate by 0.15 percentage point to 1.95%.

“This may provide room to go ahead with any form of monetary easing," Gyula Pleschinger, a member of the nine-strong monetary policy council of the National Bank of Hungary, said in an interview. “But we have to be quite careful since Hungary is a small and open economy. We are therefore quite cautious with these moves."

Mr. Pleschinger hit a more cautious tone than central bank Governor Gyorgy Matolcsy, who said after the March 24 rate cut that the central bank is ready to lower its main policy rate as long as headline inflation isn't near the bank's 3% target.

Most economists expect the central bank will continue to cut rates to 1.50% or even beyond.

Mr. Pleschinger didn't provide a prediction on how far borrowing costs could fall but said the bank has more room now in the wake of the government-mandated conversion of mounting household mortgage debts denominated in foreign currencies, mainly the Swiss franc. The government ended the exposure of borrowers to foreign-currency swings in November last year, before the Swiss National Bank in January this year stopped defending its currency from rising against the euro and other currencies.

“Monetary policy used to be constrained as households used to be much more vulnerable," Mr. Pleschinger said.

Trading at levels below the psychologically and technically significant level of 300 forint against the euro, the Hungarian currency is currently at its strongest in some 14 months, partly owing to the European Central Bank's quantitative-easing program, Mr. Pleschinger said.

“The level of the exchange rate is only of interest to us if it influences inflation. The pass-through [from the Hungarian forint's exchange rate level to inflation] is low. Therefore, foreign-exchange movements are not that interesting to us at this stage," Mr. Pleschinger said.

“Because of the small pass-through, a substantial and sustained [forint] appreciation would be needed to influence our policy," he added, reiterating that the central bank has no exchange-rate target.

The volatility of the forint against the euro ranged between 6% and 6.5% over the past two years, which the central banker said isn't significant.

“As long as there are no extreme ups and downs, we are not worried," Mr. Pleschinger said.

The central bank expects that Hungary's economy will recover to precrisis levels by the end of 2016 or the first quarter of 2017, meaning a close in the gap between its actual and potential output. At that point the forint's exchange rate would start to have an increasing impact on inflation, Mr. Pleschinger said.

Hungary's economy expanded 3.6% last year and its budget deficit of 2.6% of gross domestic product remained safely below the European Union's 3% tolerance threshold, while its public debt, still the highest among its regional peers, fell to 77% of GDP. Expectations that Hungary could be upgraded back to investment grade later this year from its current junk status have been boosting its local-currency government bonds.

Still, Hungary is facing geopolitical and financial market risks, Mr. Pleschinger added. A consideration for the monetary council for the medium term is the expected policy tightening by the U.S. Federal Reserve, the central banker said. As a result of the Fed's eventual interest-rate increase, U.S.-based investors' risk appetite may fall and some may consider pulling out from Hungarian assets, he added.

The Hungarian central bank expects the dollar to continue strengthening in the medium term against the euro. In the medium term, a rise in U.S. interest rates could give a boost to Hungarian exports, he said. Car makers, including Germany's Mercedes and Audi which have manufacturing plants in Hungary and are a backbone of its economic strength, conduct a large part of their business with countries outside the eurozone.
