'Noflation' is welcome, but there are dangers

Rampant inflation is bad, so no inflation must be good, right? Well, only up to a point and only for a while. Official figures show that prices remained stable in February, the first time the monthly CPI measure has registered 0.0 per cent since comparable records began in 1989. In most respects, so-called "noflation" is welcome because it has a positive impact on household budgets - and it will come as a relief for many people after a period when wages didn't keep up with inflation. So far the collapse in fuel prices has pushed down prices not just for energy but goods that need to be transported, including food. Next month it is expected that the CPI will go negative when recent cuts in gas prices show up in the figures for the first time.

The big question for Britain is whether this presages the beginnings of the same deflationary pressures currently afflicting the eurozone, where prices fell by 0.6 per cent in the year to January. While George Osborne, the Chancellor, welcomed the zero rate - and it will certainly do his party no harm in the coming election - he knows it would not be healthy for this to translate into a lengthy period of deflation more often associated with economic slumps such as the Depression of the Thirties, or Japan's more recent lost decades.

Although consumers can enjoy frozen or falling prices for the present, policymakers need to be wary of them becoming entrenched. Some economists believe the dangers of deflation are greater than is being made out by the Bank of England and the Treasury. Mark Carney, the Bank governor, expects this to be a blip before inflation picks up again and heads back towards the annual 2 per cent target. With oil prices stabilising and even going back up again he may well be right.

But if he is wrong then the long-term consequences are serious. The recent rebound in the pound adds another deflationary bias. What to do about it is another matter. Andy Haldane, the Bank's chief economist, recently surprised the markets by indicating that looser monetary policy may be needed and the next move in interest rates could be down rather than up. Whether it would make any difference is an interesting question.

Economic theory would suggest that when the economy grows and jobs are created, prices will rise. But as Japan has discovered to its cost, it can be hard to get out of a deflationary spiral once in one, especially in heavily indebted countries like the UK. In the Seventies, we had high inflation but falling output, again because of the oil price, which had risen sharply. Now we have the opposite. Neither is a congenial state of affairs.
